Interviewer: It’s March 31, 2010, and this is the first interview with Pete Bancroft,otherwise known as Paul Bancroft III. We are in his apartment in SanFrancisco.Why “Pete” when your formal name is Paul? Bancroft: Well, I was named Paul III when I was born, and since my father was Paul Jr.,immediately after that he started calling me Little Petey. And as I grew up Ididn’t like Little Petey very much, and so therefore it gradually morphed intobeing Pete, which is what I prefer. I’ve had a lot of fun through the yearsbecause when anybody calls and asks for Paul I know it’s an insurancesalesman or somebody I really don’t know, so I’ve found it’s a useful tool tocontinue.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, very handy. I should say that there is a longer oral history that yourdaughter Kim took that gets into the Bancroft family history in great detail.But I’d like to record at least a potted version, maybe starting with HubertHowe Bancroft, the Bancroft Library’s founder. Bancroft: Sure. Absolutely. He was born in 1832 in Granville, Ohio, got part waythrough high school and then went back to Buffalo, New York to go to workfor his brother-in-law, who was his older sister’s husband, in a book shop inBuffalo. He sort of apprenticed there for a couple of years, and during thistime the Gold Rush came along, and his brother-in-law decided to send himout to California with a consignment of books to sell in San Francisco. So indue course they sent off the books to go around the Cape. He went down andwent across the Isthmus of Panama, came up to San Francisco, and then wentto work in the gold fields for six months while he was awaiting the arrival ofthe books. And when they arrived, just about the time he got ready to set upshop and sell them, his brother-in-law died, and most of the assets that werereadily available were in the books that he had been sent. So he felt it wasincumbent upon himself to get rid of those books as fast as he could and goback East to try and help take care of the affairs of his sister.He arrived here early in 1852. He then returned east to help settle his sister’saffairs and spent another year or so, tried to settle back into a combination ofGranville, Ohio and Buffalo and really didn’t like it. He had been bitten by theCalifornia bug. He decided that he was going to come out here and make alifetime career of being in California. I think he was intrigued with the rapidchanges he had seen in his first trip and wanted to learn more about thisdeveloping area. He perhaps didn’t know the exact statistics at that point, but as we now know, there were fewer than seven thousand non-Indians in thewhole of what’s now the state of California in 1847. And within two yearsafter that a hundred thousand people had come in because of the Gold Rush.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Amazing. Bancroft: So a whole new civilization was being developed out of this sleepy littlecommunity out here. He evolved over time into first being fascinated by it andthen wanting to record it. He realized gradually that this was kind of the lastmarch of Western civilization. That it started in China and moved across Asiato Western Europe and then jumped the Atlantic to the eastern seaboard andas far west as St. Joe [St. Joseph], Missouri. And that really is as far as thedeveloped part of America had gotten, except for Lewis and Clark and a fewtrappers. There was this huge hiatus until all of a sudden the Gold Rush, andthen the big jump. He was absolutely intrigued with that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Interesting that he caught the historic aspect of it, whereas, speaking in broadterms, most people were looking at a way of making money, either throughgold or setting up businesses. Bancroft: Well, he was anxious to make money. But he was fascinated by the fact thatmost migrations have been of families and have been very slow, and youbarely eked out a living. Here there was an instant money economy that wasbeing created out of nothing. Because of gold it was a very liquid economy.Most of the miners hated their mining, but they had to eat and they had tohave clothes and they had to have all kinds of things. Many of the miners hadbeen dirt farmers in the East who left farming precisely to look for gold, butwhen they got out here and found what was going on they realized that up inMarin County and out in the Sacramento Valley there were all kinds of placesto grow food, to sell food to the miners as a cash crop. So you had an instantcommercial civilization developing in one fell swoop, starting with a hundredthousand people from the Gold Rush.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was he well educated? Bancroft: No, he was pretty well self-educated. He became very well self-educated. Ihave found as I have read through Literary Industries: [A Memoir] that heliberally quotes people in French and in Latin. He was very well read, and itwas all done on his own, because he only got through half of high school.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, do you want to lead up to the library part of it? [laughter]  Bancroft: Sure. This developed over time. First of all he was trying to do somechronicles, specifically the Handbook Almanac for 1860, and he had a gentnamed William H. Knight working with him. They would try to chronicle oneperiod after another in California history. He would go out and acquirewhatever pamphlets or magazines or newspapers he could find. He graduallybuilt up this shelf of stuff for Mr. Knight who, with him, was trying to do theequivalent of an almanac of this area. One thing led to another, and he waskind of nuts about collecting. He didn’t want to sell anything that he ever got.And he began looking further and further afield to find what he could. Hediscovered in going to Europe and sending some of his agents to Europe that alot of the second sons of wealthy people in England and France and Germanyand elsewhere— The firstborn son always had primogeniture and so wouldinherit whatever the family estate or fortune was. The second sons were welleducated but either had to join the army or fend for themselves. And many ofthem came out here as visitors and kept diaries. He suddenly found, himselfand through his agents, a number of these diaries available in London andBerlin and elsewhere. So one thing led to another, and then he extended hisstudies to go all the way up to Alaska and down to Mexico and as far east asthe Rockies. So he began building up this set of materials, and they started out down onMerchant Street and Montgomery where Tommy Toy’s restaurant is now.Then eventually he got a building at the 721-731 Market Street area, and ashis business grew it wasn’t big enough to house the library and his printingbusiness. Also they were very worried about fires. And so over a period oftime he eventually bought a plot out on Valencia Street, just off Mission.There he built a pretty well fireproofed building in the center of some emptyground with a big fence around it and space—because there were a lot of firesin San Francisco—so that it would be out of harm’s way. This was highlyfortuitous because the big earthquake and fire of 1906 arrived, the fire washalted only a block away from the library building. Meanwhile, he had beennegotiating for some time to sell the library to the University of California.And this was a wonderful story because while the library had been appraisedfor something over $300,000, they had agreed that he would sell it to theUniversity for $250,000. He got quite close to the wire on that, and theycame to him and said, “Mr. Bancroft, we can only raise $150,000. Would youconsider selling the library to us for that?” And he was highly incensed andsaid, “No way! My library is worth $250,000 if it’s worth a penny.” So heanonymously gave $100,000 to the university, and they in due course boughtthe library for $250,000. And that’s how it came to be there [at the Universityof California]. It remained housed on Valencia Street, however, until a weekor so after the 1906 fire whereupon it was hastily transferred to the Berkeleycampus. Of course, it’s a great special purpose library that compares, I think, to theBeinecke [Rare Book and Manuscript Library] at Yale, and a very few others. It’s not a big part of the Berkeley campus but I think it’s an important part ofthe campus and the history. And it’s continued to grow. You know moreabout it than I do because you are there a lot more than I am.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All right, let’s go up through time, starting with your grandparents on bothsides and a little bit about your parents. Bancroft: Okay, well, [Hubert Howe Bancroft] and his second wife, Matilda, had threesons and a daughter. He had been married once before to Emily Ketchum andhad a daughter, Kate, with her. Emily died in 1859. HH married Matilda in1876 and produced the three sons and a daughter at the tail end. He wasalways, unfortunately, more partial to boys than he was to girls, at least that’swhat I found out as I’ve gotten to know various members of the family. Hisoldest son was Paul Sr., who was my grandfather; then he had a slightlyyounger brother, Griffing, and then the youngest brother, Philip. Philip reallymade something of a name for himself as a farmer in the Central Valley. Heran for the US Senate twice and was a well known figure in NorthernCalifornia. My grandfather, Paul, was a supervisor in the City of SanFrancisco, elected either two or three times around 1907, 1909, 1911.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you remember him? Bancroft: Oh yes, I remember him quite well. He was married to a woman namedLouise Hazzard from San Diego. They had just the one son, Paul Jr. Paul Sr.had gone to Harvard, as had his youngest brother, Philip, and he lived andworked in San Francisco, loved fishing and loved poker, as did his youngerbrother Philip. They taught me both fishing and poker at a very early age. It’skind of run in the family. He lived until 1957, because I remember very wellthat he was going to be eighty later that year, and he really wanted to see hisfirst great-grandchild, who would have been my eldest son. He didn’t quitemake it; he died just before that. So that’s why I happen to remember thatyear. It was also the same year that my mother died. She also really wanted agrandson, and that didn’t work either. My grandfather and grandmother livedout in Sea Cliff [a San Francisco neighborhood], and I remember him as akindly, rather taciturn elderly gentleman.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: He was a businessman? Bancroft: More or less. Hubert Howe was very strong, and as often happens, the nextgeneration doesn’t accomplish quite as much. My grandfather was put incharge of managing the Bancroft properties, which included the buildingdown on Market Street and where the Galaxy Theater now is. It was the St.Dunstan’s Hotel in those days, on Van Ness and Sutter. But other than being a supervisor in San Francisco— I have read newspaper clips where heapparently made a significant contribution in helping to get the architect todesign what’s now City Hall, which is one of the better-looking buildings. Ihad not known that until recently. I found that out because Hubert Howe’swife, Matilda, my great-grandmother, kept a diary which I had known nothingabout until my daughter Kim found it recently over at the [Bancroft] library.So Kim and I spent a day going through that diary, and in it there werenewspaper clippings of my grandfather and his contributions to City Hall. Andso, wonder of wonders, I’m learning more as I grow older.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All right, and then your birth and your siblings. Tell me about that generationplease. Bancroft: Well, Dad was an only child, and I was an only child, also. Dad was born in1904, and he lived until 1995. He went east to Yale, not to Harvard, and thenhe worked in New York a good part of his life. I might back around a little bitfor a moment to my mother’s side of the family. They were very Irish. Thefamily name was Manning, and my mother’s grandfather was about the samevintage as my great-grandfather Bancroft. John B. Manning came over fromIreland during the potato famine and worked as a stevedore on the New Yorkdocks. He saved a little bit of money and apparently, I’m told, he investedwhat little he could save in Union banknotes, which during the Civil War wereselling for about ten cents on the dollar because in New York they thought theNorth was going to lose the war. When the North did win the war, why histen-cent-on-the-dollar bank notes were worth a good deal more. So he stoppedbeing a stevedore and went into Wall Street.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh my heavens. Only in America, right? [laughter] Bancroft: Right. The Manning side of the family did rather well, and he was involved insome very interesting things. Among the more interesting was he thought atone point there was going to be a canal built through the Isthmus of Panama.There was a little railroad that ran through there, so he went down through hisconnections in Wall Street, and he bought a major interest in the railroad, sohe had a controlling interest in it. And then a gentleman named [Ferdinand]de Lesseps, who had built the Suez Canal, came along with the Frenchgovernment, and they decided they would like to build the Panama Canal.They came to him and they wanted to buy the stock so they could control therailroad. Well, he had paid about $4 a share for all of the stock that he wasable to get, and he sold it for $200 a share to the French.They tried very hard to build the Panama Canal, and of course they ran intoyellow fever and all of the problems that came up. And so they eventuallyabandoned it, whereupon they dumped the stock back on the market, and he was prescient enough to buy it back again, for the most part at pretty close to$4 a share! And eventually when, under the Teddy Roosevelt regime, Americawanted to build the Panama Canal, he agreed to sell it to the United Statesgovernment for not a penny more or less than he had sold it to the Frenchgovernment. So he sold it a second time for $200 a share. He had seven oreight children, and my Grandfather, Daniel Manning, was one of those. Hewas a stockbroker, but he didn’t do terribly well in life; he went up and downlike a yoyo; he was a speculator.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is this family in New York? Bancroft: They stayed in New York throughout. So my mother, Rita Markoe Manning,was born in New York in 1907 and grew up in New York. She and my fathermet over in Europe in 1927, I think, when he was just getting out of Yale. Hechased her around New York and married her in 1928, and I was born in 1930in New York. And so that’s the story of both sides of my background.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You were born in the middle of the Depression. Bancroft: Right in the middle of the Depression. Yes, my father, when he got out ofYale, started out as a stockbroker, and when the crash hit he ended up sellingcigarettes. He used to walk up and down Broadway every day peddling PhilipMorris cigarettes. I remember it because when I was a young man there was alittle midget dressed in a red suit and a red hat who looked like a bellboy in ahotel, and his name was Johnny [Roventini]. And all the advertising on theradio in those days was, [imitating Johnny] “Call for Philip Morris.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I remember that. Bancroft: Little red hat.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, cocked on the side of his head. Bancroft: So my father brought Johnny dutifully to meet me, and of course Johnny wasabout my size. [laughing] I was like eight or nine years old, and I got a bigwhen I was five years old. And then Dad stayed on in New York, and mymother ended up marrying a fellow named Blair Foster out here.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You were living with your mother?  Bancroft: I was living with my mother for the most part. My stepfather was— Hisfather, Walter Foster, had started with a dentist named George Kleiser, the oldFoster and Kleiser billboard company. And so I grew up with Blair Foster asmy stepfather and my mother, although I visited my father each year.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What was home life like in terms of discipline? What kind of expectationswere there of you? Bancroft: They were pretty tough. They wanted to be sure I wasn’t spoiled since I wasan only child. Particularly as I got into my early teens, they were a little roughon me, particularly my stepfather. When he’d get upset he used to ask mewhat I’d do if he threw me out of the house without a nickel. And of course Ididn’t know what I’d do, but I was determined at that stage of the game I wasgoing to make enough nickels so that I’d be able to take care of myself. And Ilook back on that as probably one of the better things that happened to me,because it gave me a lot of incentive to succeed.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh really. Bancroft: But it was generally a fairly happy home life.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was Yale always in the cards since your father had gone there? Bancroft: Well, my father had gone to Exeter and to Yale, and he was a real bon vivantwho had a lot of fun in life. He didn’t make a whole lot of money, and hewasn’t supporting me as I grew up; I was really being supported by mystepfather. My stepfather had gone to a place called Culver Military Academyin Indiana, and to Stanford. I always wanted to go to Yale. Early in WorldWar II when I was in the sixth and seventh grade— Well, my father was in thenavy in Washington; my stepfather had joined the navy out here andeventually went out to the South Pacific. But I had a feeling all along that if Iwent to my stepfather’s boarding school, Culver, he might pay the freight forme to go to Yale afterwards, even though my father had been to Yale, andthat’s exactly the way it worked out. So I became a lobbyist at a very earlyage.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you have a reason for wanting Yale other than the fact that that’s whatyour father had done? Bancroft: I thought a great deal of it. I saw Dad every summer, and the tales he told meof Yale and his Yale friends that I met I’ve always enjoyed immensely. And I should also say that a very big reason for going there is it just happened to bethree thousand miles away from home. [laughter] So it got me across thecountry. I loved Yale. I didn’t like Culver very much, although it was goodfor me, but I truly loved Yale.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I read that you roomed with Bill [William D.] Witter. [telephone interruption] Bancroft: I had grown up knowing Bill here in San Francisco, and when I got to Yale,my first year I was rooming with three of the people that I had been to Culverwith. But since I knew all them I really wanted to branch out. And Bill grewup in San Francisco and had gone to Hotchkiss; his roommate at Hotchkisshad been a fellow named Brad Dillman who had then come to Yale. And thelast roommate was a fellow named Bob Arnold who had grown up in Seattleand then gone to Lawrenceville. So we all got together at the end of freshmanyear and roomed together for our remaining three years while we were incollege. Bill and I were very close friends and continued that way until theday he died.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did that lead to other business relationships? Bancroft: Yes, Bill and I did some investing together. He is also the one that introducedme to Bessemer Securities, which I would not have known, I don’t think,without Bill getting me in there.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: We have a series of interviews with the Witter family. There’s one with a BillWitter, but it isn’t your Bill Witter. Bancroft: Right, there’s a Chicago Bill, as I called him, William Witter. William D.Witter, who was my roommate, was Dean Witter’s second son. Dean Witterstarted the firm of Dean Witter and Company. His oldest son was DeanWitter, Jr. or Cap, as we called him, and the younger brother was Bill, or myBill, if you will. He worked for Dean Witter for a number of years, and thenleft to start his own firm, with his father’s blessing. I stayed in quite closetouch with him through that period. After Yale and the service, Bill Witterwent to Stanford Business School, and while he was there he roomed withDon Lucas, who later was one of my partners at Draper, Gaither & Anderson.So it’s a small world.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, it certainly is. I’ve noticed all the interconnections among the firstgeneration venture capitalists. What did you major in at Yale?  Bancroft: Mostly the Yale Daily News. I was intrigued with being on the News. I lovedit, and I spent most of my waking time there. My true major was adivisional—sociology, psychology, and literature. But I really enjoyed thenewspaper. Also, while a junior at Yale, several of us started a publicationcalled Careers which we sold during the summers. Well, we sold advertisingduring the summers and then distributed it to colleges, so I guess that was mymain occupation, if you will.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And what was Careers? Bancroft: Careers was a book in which we sold what effectively were full pages, or twopages, of advertising to companies who were recruiting in the Ivy Leaguecampuses. But they didn’t treat it as advertising; they treated it as theopportunity to do an infomercial, if you will. I didn’t know the term in thosedays. They wrote up who they were, what kind of college graduates they werelooking for, and how you should go about applying. And we sold those adsfor $235 a page to all the companies we could find that were recruiting in theIvy League. Then we had the book printed and bound into hardcover anddistributed free of charge to college seniors all through the Ivy League, upand down. It was fun, and we made some pretty nice money out of it. Then wegot broken up by the Korean War, so as soon as I graduated, instead ofcontinuing with Careers, I joined the military.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That must have been a novel idea, was it not? Bancroft: Yes, it was. It kind of came out of the advertising concepts I had practiced atthe Yale News where I used to do New York weekend pages or college skiweekend pages. I would go to the various colleges, mostly girls’ colleges, andwe would go to all the restaurants nearby and get them to do advertising withus to put in the Yale News. The Yale News had five columns. There were twocolumns of advertising on the left and two on the right, and then we’d have acolumn of editorial in the middle. We would use the editorial to write up therestaurants that advertised, of course. It was a good way to spend some timeaway from Yale, to meet girls, and it was quite profitable for the Yale Newsbecause we were getting a lot of money for a one or a two-page ad.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You were more on the business side, right? You were not a journalist writingarticles? Bancroft: No, I was always on the business side, and I ended up being business managerof the News. That and advertising were always the things that I was mostinterested in. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Had it always been in your mind that you were going into business of somesort? Bancroft: Yes, I figured always I was going to be in business, in part because starting atan early age I wanted to make money, and in part because my backgroundthrough my stepfather had been with advertising through the billboards, theoutdoor advertising. So I really kind of thought I wanted to go into anadvertising agency during a lot of this period. Not for sure, but it was kind ofthe area that I was heading in. I didn’t get into the real interest in finance until,really, we started Careers. And at that stage of the game, why some of myfather’s friends who I was talking to said, “You know you really ought to gointo Wall Street because you’ll find that it’ll be much more to your liking thanadvertising.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And that was convincing? Bancroft: Well, it was. With Careers I ended up selling two pages to Merrill Lynch, andI had a grand time doing that. They bought two pages describing their hiringpractices and what have you, and I thought it was a wonderful firm. It turnedout that a man named Bob Magowan, who later became chairman of Safeway,was, at that time, the vice president of marketing for Merrill Lynch. He wasmarried to Doris Merrill, who had been the daughter of Charles [E.] Merrill,who had started Merrill Lynch. My father knew that family well, and so I hadan in to this guy, but I didn’t use it. I went in cold turkey, and it was only afterI had sold the two pages in Careers to Merrill Lynch that the personnelmanager, to whom I had made the sale, introduced me to Mr. Magowan forhis blessing. I didn’t mention the family connection until after he approvedthe sale to Careers. I was always very proud of the fact that I had not used thecontact in order to make the sale. But it made me very partial to MerrillLynch. Many years later when I got out of the service I went back to Merrill Lynch,and that’s where I started.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You graduated from Yale in 1951 and then immediately went to theGeorgetown Foreign Service Institute? Bancroft: What happened was, immediately out of Yale I joined what we’ll call theDepartment of Defense and spent some time with them. They put me throughvarious kinds of training programs. I went down to Fort Benning with them,and eventually I was going to go overseas, and this wasn’t making sensebecause they wouldn’t promise me credit for the draft if I spent three yearsworking as a civilian. I said, “Well, you know, if you’re not going to promise me credit for the draft I think I better quit.” So I did, and I was able to get adirect commission as a second lieutenant in the air force, partly because of theROTC training I’d had at Culver, and partly because of the sort of intelligenceand public relations experience that I’d had in Washington. They sent me toGeorgetown Foreign Service Institute. It was basically a foreign relationscourse at Georgetown Foreign Service Institute. I had a very good time.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And then you went to Korea and Japan, right? Bancroft: I did. I went to Korea and spent all of 1954 there, and at the end of that I wasdue to— If I had come home, I would have had another year under my airforce contract. I learned in Korea that if I transferred to Headquarters Fifth AirForce (Rear), which was in Nagoya, Japan, I could extend my Far East tourfor six months. And when I got home then, in July of 1955, I would get out ofthe service right away, because if you had less than six months left to serve inyour contract they wouldn’t reassign you.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh really. Bancroft: So I thought gee, this is great. By this time I had gotten married to the formerMae Godwin, whom I met in Korea, and so we moved to Nagoya, Japan,where we lived in a little Japanese house for six months while I worked atFifth Air Force Headquarters (Rear) and had a grand time.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What were you doing for the military? Bancroft: In part I was writing propaganda pamphlets. I was also in basically theestimates end of intelligence where you gather all of the stuff that comes in,and you do write-ups for the troops and briefings of the general staff. Where Iended up, I really enjoyed it because there was a major I was working for whohad to brief the commanding general of Fifth Air Force every morning on thenews of the day, but the classified news. I was preparing the briefings forhim. He turned up sick one day so they put me in as the substitute briefer. Iwas shaking in my boots, because I was— By that time I think I was a firstlieutenant, and here I was, giving a three-star general a briefing. This went onfor several days until the major for whom I was working recovered. When hecame back to work the general threw him out and kept me doing the briefings.So the rest of my stay there I had just a fine time. [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So that was a four-year stint between Yale and your getting out of the militaryin 1955?  Bancroft: Yes, I got out of Yale in June of ’51 and I didn’t really have a chance to jointhe business community until late 1955. I spent three years in the air force anda year mucking around with the Defense Department.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And then you went to Merrill Lynch. But briefly [1956-57], right? Bancroft: Well, I went through their training program, and while I was finishing that upmy mother took ill. Actually, after I got out of the service I went on a delayedhoneymoon, because I got married in Hong Kong. My wife had come fromFlorida, but she was stationed in Korea, and we got married in Hong Kong.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So she was in the military? Bancroft: She was also working for the government as a civilian. [chuckling] We met inKorea under the auspices of some friends, and we got married eventually inHong Kong. In November of ’54 my mother and stepfather came out to Tokyoon a visit, and I took what they call an R&R and went to Tokyo, taking myeventually to-be wife there with me, and so she met my parents. I wasthinking seriously about marrying her, and I talked them into staying overfrom Thanksgiving until Christmas; they went to Hong Kong. So we tookanother R&R at Christmastime. We got married in Hong Kong during theChristmas holidays and then moved into the Japanese house in Nagoya. Ienjoyed my service career. In any event, when I got out the following July, wetook a six-month trip around the world. I got a job at Merrill Lynch but thentook a deferral before I went to work while we took the delayed honeymoon.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You got the job at Merrill Lynch without using your in? Bancroft: Well, by using my two pages that I’d sold them years earlier in Careers, I toldthe same head of personnel that I’d like to join Merrill.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, but not using your connection? Bancroft: No. Besides I think Bob Magowan had already joined Safeway by that time.Anyway, while I was in the training program my mother took ill with cancer,here. She had a lung cancer operation, and it didn’t work out very well, so sheonly had a few weeks after that. Merrill Lynch was nice enough to let mework in their San Francisco office while I was here, so I was still technicallytraining. But I would get up at the crack of dawn every day and commute toSan Francisco and do some work in their back office. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now was that routine for financial houses to have a training program for newrecruits? Bancroft: The bigger ones did. Interestingly, my father’s best friend at Yale was afellow named Herbie [George Herbert] Walker, [Jr.] who was the uncle ofPresident Bush I [George H. W. Bush]. He was Bush’s mother’s brother, andhe had a firm in New York called G.H. Walker and Company. I had sold G.H.Walker and Company a page in Careers way back when. And so I went to seeHerbie and said, “I think I’d like to join Wall Street. Can I go to work foryou?” And he said, “Sure you can.” But he said, “Frankly you’d be of a lotmore use to me if you got some training first, and I suggest you go to one ofthe bigger firms where they have a formal training program.” And I said,“Like Merrill Lynch?” He said, “Yes.” I said, “Okay.” So, that’s when I wentto Merrill Lynch.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That must have been your first formal training in finance/business? Bancroft: Yes, other than having been business manager of the Yale News, because thatwas a profit-making organization, unlike most college newspapers.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How much did you learn in the training program? Bancroft: Well, I learned a lot about accounting, because I never took accounting atYale. For a guy that ended up in the investment business that was kind ofdumb. [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But Yale doesn’t have a business school, does it? Bancroft: Oh yes, they’ve got a very good business school. School of Management.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And they did in those days? Bancroft: They did not. It started after that. But my problem was that by the time I mighthave gone to a graduate school, business school, like Harvard or Stanfordwhere most of these people you’ve been interviewing went, I was married andhad spent enough time in the service, and I wanted to go to work. So I decidedI really didn’t want business school. A lot of people have asked me if I missedit, and the answer is, as the years went by I certainly could have used thebreadth that I would have gained there. But on the other hand, as some of your interviewees have said, you kind of pick it up as you go along in the school ofhard knocks.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Don Valentine said in his oral history something to the effect that hedeliberately avoided hiring MBAs. [laughter] So maybe you did just as welldoing it the way you did it. Bancroft: Well, we each have our foibles. If he avoided MBAs— I found through muchof my career when I was looking for people to bring into the companies wewere financing, I would avoid either the East Coast or the West Coast becauseI felt people that grew up in the Midwest had a very fine work ethic, incomparison to many of the people I had known on both coasts. So I was verypartial to hiring people with a Midwest background.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You didn’t stay at Merrill Lynch very long [1956-57]. Bancroft: I finished the training and they put me in an office on Forty-eighth Street. Isold securities for about six months, and I didn’t really like it—largelybecause I had to develop customers, and I had always thought that I mightwant to come back to California some day. But I didn’t want to be dependenton a lot of individuals whom I was selling stocks to. I really wanted to get intowhat we called the buying department in those days, which was theinvestment banking end where the companies would be who you were reallyworking for rather than developing individual clients. I tried to agitate inMerrill Lynch to do that, but they wouldn’t make the change. So I figuredafter I sold securities for six months I’d probably paid them back for thetraining they gave me, and so I thanked them very much and left, and that’swhen I joined [F.] Eberstadt [and Company] downtown [1957-62].<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was it just the way things went that people did the training program and thensold securities? Bancroft: Yes, basically it was a sales training program to turn you into a customers’man or account executive, as they called them then and still do.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And then you end up at Eberstadt, which is an investment—well, they’re bothinvestment banks, aren’t they? Bancroft: But Eberstadt did not have a retail clientele at all. Their business was solelydoing deals for companies. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. Bancroft: Either private placements and raising the money or helping to take thempublic and being the underwriters of the companies going public. And that’swhat I really wanted to do because I figured I’d get into the meat ofbusinesses by doing that. So, Eberstadt was very good; they hired me for a 50percent raise from what I was making at Merrill Lynch.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: They weren’t dismayed by the fact that you had spent a relatively short time atMerrill? Bancroft: No, because they also understood that I had stayed long enough to pay themback for the money they’d put into me.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. And you probably told them why you left. Bancroft: Oh sure, absolutely. I enjoyed Eberstadt immensely. Again, I learned a wholelot because what we were doing there was we would provide financings forcompanies that were trying to raise the money either privately or publicly. Forexample, one of my best jobs at Eberstadt, I was sent out with an associate ofmine, Bradford Mills, to Hawaii, and we got into two of the big five out there,Hawaiian Commercial & Sugar and Alexander & Baldwin. Alexander &Baldwin already owned a good part of Hawaiian Commercial & Sugar andwanted to acquire the balance. Brad Mills did what we call a factual analysisof Alexander & Baldwin, and I did a factual analysis of Hawaiian Commercial& Sugar. And then we wrote them all up into a give or take fifty-page privatememorandum, which is like a prospectus describing everything about thebusiness. Then Brad and I put our heads together and tried to decide what theproper values should be for each company and what ratio should be used forthe one to acquire the balance of the other so that they would merge. We thenwent back and presented our work to Mr. Eberstadt and the other partners whothen refined it to their liking. They would meet with the heads of thecompanies. They were the investment banker who recommend what the termsof the merger ought to be and, in effect, blessed it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you just picking this up? Because you hadn’t had any experience withmergers, and I imagine that’s a pretty complicated thing to do. Bancroft: You learn as go. [chuckling] The writing of the factual report was a way ofreally getting to know the company and getting it all written down andanalyzing everything about it you could. And that put both Brad Mills and meinto a pretty good position to argue with each other what relative value each company might have to the other. Of course we had a lot of help from thepartners we were working for, who showed us where we were crazy or told uswhen we were right. And that’s the kind of thing we did.Another deal was United Artists. There was a company called Ziv TelevisionProductions that did the series on Lassie. Remember when you were a kidthere were all those episodes of Lassie? Well, Ziv was going to be bought byUnited Artists, and United Artists wasn’t sure what kind of price they reallyought to pay. So one of the things I did was to work hard on doing an analysisof Ziv and of United Artists and then presented that to my boss who thenworked on what the terms ought to be. You learn a lot in something like that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now were people higher up becoming impressed with Pete Bancroft? Bancroft: I hope so.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [laughter] Well, you’re not that old, and you haven’t had formal training, andthey could have looked skeptically—is this young man going to really provehimself? Bancroft: That was always an early problem because one of the things that I wasencouraged to do with Eberstadt was to bring in business. You know, inaddition to doing the work of the firm that other partners were bringing in andworking for them, I was encouraged to bring in business. But I was onlytwenty-seven years old, and I looked like a baby then, and I’m told I still dorelative to my age of eighty at the moment. So I looked like I was still prettywet behind the ears, but that’s the way it goes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, by now you have connections, and you come across now, and I’mpresuming then, as a very suave and sophisticated person. Were the socialgraces, that I presume you had then as you do now, oiling the machinerysomewhat and making contacts with people whom you could then do businesswith? Bancroft: Oh I think all of that is very important. I’m reminded of the story years laterwhen I appeared before a panel of students at Yale. I was in the venturecapital business by that time, and in the Q&A after the discussion they said,“What is the most important course that we can take at Yale to prepare us tobe good venture capitalists?” And much to the delight of the dean, and not tothe delight of the students, I said, “Take daily themes so you learn how to readand write in the English language, because if you can’t write and if you can’texpress yourself you can’t sell, and if you can’t sell you’re never going to goanyplace.” I always felt that it was very important to develop the skill of being able to speak in public and to sell and to write. And of course I had donea lot of writing at Yale where I used a lot of adjectives and adverbs and had alot of fun. When I first got to Eberstadt I was asked by my first boss there, one of thepartners, to do a report on a company. I went out and I laboriously— I hadtaken a typing course in high school so I could type, which made me able tonot only write faster but it was more legible. And I came in, and he gave meback the paper the next day. I don’t think there were three or four wordsbetween red [cross-out] lines anyplace, and he said, “Bancroft, what we’reinterested in is nouns and verbs and as few adverbs and adjectives as possible.These are supposed to be factual reports, so go back and make it better.” Ilearned a whole different style of writing, business writing, which was veryhelpful later on in the kinds of reports that I did, and to get the training to helpgo on from there.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It seems from what you’ve told me that you’re already developing a networkof connections, presumably on both coasts. Bancroft: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because you have West Coast family ties, but you’ve now spent quite a bit oftime on the East Coast too. Were you a little unusual in that? Bancroft: I think so. Most of the people that started east, stayed east, and most of thosethat started west stayed west, unless they went to Harvard Business School.But you have seen in the interviews you’ve done with these early venturecapitalists how important Harvard Business School was to them.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. Bancroft: And a lot of that was Georges Doriot, whom I never met because I didn’t gothere. But an awful lot were the connections that they made there that theycould use later on.My father used to tell me as a result of his Yale training in his day that if hewanted to reach somebody in the United States for one reason or another thatusually within three or four phone calls he could find somebody that wouldintroduce him to the person. And also I was brought up— Every Christmasand every time my family had a party, I was made to either give a toast ormake a talk, so I was taught to talk in front of people at an early age, which Ifelt was pretty important. I brought up all my kids the same way. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So the social graces are important for many reasons? Bancroft: Yes, I mean they’re not overriding, but they certainly help.I guess what I should do here is to give you a bit of a segue into what Ithought was lacking in the investment banking field.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, please do. Bancroft: There I found that if we were asked to do a financing for a company, the kindof things I was describing, if we did a good job and it worked, the president ofthe company who we were doing the work for took all the credit. Whatever itwas we were trying to do, like suggesting a merger or what have you, if itdidn’t work then it was my fault. That seemed to me to be the real world butnot necessarily a fair world. The other thing was that you would work for ayear and get a fee, because in investment banking, unlike venture capital, yourfees come from transactions or what you’re paid to do, and—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Above and beyond a base salary? Bancroft: The fees that the firms would get out, of which I was paid a base salary and abonus.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Okay, I see. Bancroft: And so I would find that the first of every new year, the slate was wiped clean.And what are you going to do for me next year [my boss would ask]? So younever built up any credit for what had been done in the past, other than youmight develop a reputation with your boss for having done a good job.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why would a corporation set it up that way? Bancroft: Well, because the investment banking world on Wall Street lived on fees.They were paid fees for doing private placements or fees for taking acompany public. If you have an IPO, an initial public offering, or any kind ofoffering, you might see it in the prospectus—if the stock is sold at $20 pershare, there’ll be a 5 or 6 percent fee, a dollar or $1.20, that goes to theunderwriters, and the balance ($19 or $18.80 per share) would go to thecompany and/or to the selling shareholders. Those fees were what we lived onin the investment banking world. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. I was really thinking more of the slate being wiped clean every year.Nowadays many companies put a lot of emphasis on stock purchase plans,stock options, as a way of keeping and incenting people. It seems to me theopposite thing is happening if every January 1 you’re back at square oneagain. Bancroft: That’s a whole different matter. You’re talking about companies; I’m talkingabout investment banks. They’re just living on fees and—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But they also want to keep people. Bancroft: Well, that’s why they would pay me a nice bonus and give me raises to keepme.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. Bancroft: But anyway, I thought being an investment banker was not particularly goodbecause if I do a good job on behalf of a company, the people in the companywho own the stock in the company are going to be beneficiaries long term,while the investment banker gets only his one time fee and must then go on tothe next deal. I thought if I could be in a position where I could own stock inthe companies that I’m working for, apropos of your mention of optionsgotten by whatever means, then if I do good work the company will prosperand my stock will grow in value.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. Bancroft: So I said I don’t want to be in the investment banking world either; I want tobe in the corporate side, which led me to begin to focus on the beginnings ofventure capital, because this was in a period where it was just getting going.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What year was this? Bancroft: This would have been between 1960, ‘61.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So that’s early for venture capital. Bancroft: That’s when it really kind of began—in the late ‘50s and early ‘60s. 20<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. Bancroft: I would come out here in the summers, when my mother was dying inearly ’57 and every year thereafter, to stay and visit and renew my contacts onthe West Coast. Among them, I made a new friend, Bill Witter’s StanfordBusiness School roommate, Don Lucas.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Okay, here we go. [laughter] Bancroft: So I went down to Draper, Gaither & Anderson, and I was enchanted by whatthey were doing, because they were investing the money that they had intoyoung startup companies. I thought, now this is the right place to be. So Ischmoozed them from 1960 until 1962. They started in 1959, and it was in1962 they finally offered me a job. I came out again in the summer of ’62 andvisited down there and met all the partners: General Anderson, GeneralDraper, Larry Duerig, and Bill Draper, who was General Draper’s son, myage Bill whom you’ve interviewed. I went back to New York hoping thatsomebody would give me a call. The next thing I knew young Bill, my-ageBill, decided he wanted to leave Draper, Gaither & Anderson to form his ownfirm with Pitch Johnson, whom you now know all about from the interviewsyou did with each of them. When Bill left he was leaving a hole in DG&Abecause they had the three senior partners while Bill had been one of theassociates.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, and Gaither had pretty much dropped out, hadn’t he? Bancroft: Well, Gaither had died by then. So you had basically Fred Anderson, GeneralDraper, and a fellow named Larry Duerig, who had been a securities analystwith one of the securities firms out here. I got a call shortly after I got backeast, asking me if I’d like to take over Bill Draper’s accounts and come joinDG&A and become a partner.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you think the number of years that had gone by when you were hopingyou would be invited was simply because there wasn’t a place? They neededsomebody to die or move on. [laughter] Bancroft: Yes. It was a very small field. You know, when you go back to 1959, ’60, ’61,out here you only had Arthur Rock and Tommy Davis. You had someindividuals, Ed [Edward H.] Heller and two or three others as individuals, butalmost nobody else. And when I talked to people in San Francisco aboutSilicon Valley and venture capital, nobody knew anything about them. I meannot Silicon Valley, it was Santa Clara Valley or Palo Alto in those days. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you using the term venture capital? Bancroft: No, it was ‘special situations’ or ‘private investments’, as you’ve been told bysome of the others. That’s what we called them in those days. [tape change] Bancroft: When I was out here, I would start trying to find out about venture capital orspecial situations or that kind of investing down on the [San Francisco]Peninsula. I had some friends that I’d made from growing up who were inMontgomery Street, and I had of course had some time with Merrill Lynch,and so I had some contacts there. I found to my amazement that almostnobody in San Francisco knew anything about Hewlett or Packard or thecompany Hewlett-Packard. And they had no interest in what was going ondown in the Peninsula.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How do you explain that? Bancroft: Because San Francisco was very insular. Through Blyth & Company andDean Witter, they had their financings, and they were interested in Hawaii,and they were interested in lumber products, and they were interested in thekinds of things that had been their traditional businesses.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see, none of this tech stuff. Bancroft: The whole idea of this thing going on down there—that’s very dangerous. Theonly one that I knew who knew anything about it and said, yes, it’s kind ofinteresting, was Bill [William K.] Bowes. My interest there sparked at a veryearly time; it was in 1960, ‘61.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, that’s early. Bancroft: My father had known Tommy Davis, and I think Davis & Rock started in1961. So it was suggested that maybe I ought to try to meet Tommy or talk toTommy or meet Arthur [Rock]. But I had known Don Lucas, and so it seemedto me that Davis & Rock were just starting up, but Draper, Gaither &Anderson was already fully fledged from 1959. So that’s where I kept headingback to, and they finally came around in 1962. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was anybody talking to you about the risks of venture capital? Yourexperience so far in the financial world had been with pretty conservativeinstitutions. Was it running through your mind that there is opportunity here,but there’s also great risk? Bancroft: Well, all through this period I felt that some of the younger companies I knewanything about might be higher risk, but they were higher opportunity. Andsomewhere along the line, I evolved the rationale in my mind that if you standa ruler on edge, and if six inches is an equilibrium, if you dare as high asseven you might fall as low as five. And that’s going to be it. If you shoot forten or twelve you might end up at zero, but if it works it’s going to be prettyexciting. So I clearly understood the concept of risk.There was a classmate of mine at Yale named Carl [W.] Knobloch, [Jr.] whohad gotten early into a company that went through several metamorphoses,but it ended being in the shell home business, U.S. Shell Homes. They wantedto go public, and I thought maybe that was the first company I could bringinto Eberstadt. Instead, Hayden, Stone walked away with the deal, and therejust happened to be a fellow named Arthur Rock at Hayden, Stone at thatpoint. Carl Knobloch and I remained friends forever. But you know Eberstadtwasn’t really prepared to risk that kind of underwriting, but Hayden, Stonewas. So I knew there were firms that were willing to do it, and the conceptappealed to me.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, you said in the context of not wanting to be dependent on yourstepfather that you wanted to make money. Was there more to it than theindependence that risk investment represented? Bancroft: Not at that point. That came later. You know, the joy of helping to start acompany and watching it grow and develop, and helping to create jobs andwatching companies grow like a baby, and the thrill that comes from thatcame later. Early on it was providing financing money for companies andlearning how companies work and what you need to do to get the money forthem.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What about the motivation of providing for your wife—and you have at leastone child by now? Do you have more? Bancroft: Yes, ’57 I had my first one, a son Brad. In ’58 the second one, a daughterKim. Then in ’60 the third one, a son Stephen. We were more prolific than wereally meant to be. [laughter] Then I had a fourth one in 1962, Gregory, not toleave him out. [chuckling] Yes, well, that was all part of my motivation. Iwasn’t trying to make money for the sake of sitting there and counting it; I wanted to have it so that I would have complete financial independence, lead acomfortable life and could educate my kids. When I was with Draper, Gaither& Anderson, I used to have lunch with my stepfather periodically. One day Iwas able to take him to the Woodside Pub, buy him lunch, and tell him thatthe previous year I made more money than he had ever made in a year. And sofrom now on he wasn’t going to be a stepfather, but I hoped he’d be a friend.We ended up being very good friends. So that all played into the motivations.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Let’s get back to Gaither, Draper & Anderson. What did you find when youarrived? Bancroft: I found an interesting hodgepodge of investments that they were making.Mostly individuals, Don Lucas or Crawford Cooley or General Andersonwould find something, and they’d go into it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Not necessarily high tech? Bancroft: It was more high tech than not, but not necessarily, unlike many of your otherinterviewees who stuck with high tech. I inherited a couple of companies fromBill Draper. One was a very mundane company that made different kinds oftoilets and things down in Los Angeles, and the other was Corbin-Farnsworth,which has been mentioned to you by several of your interviewees, that wasmaking defibrillators. I have noticed in some of your interviews there havebeen differing stories about Corbin-Farnsworth from different people, likefour blind men looking at an elephant, trying to describe it. The true story ofCorbin-Farnsworth was I inherited it from Bill and went on the board.We got to the point where we really needed some money, and we needed ahome. They made very good defibrillators but they didn’t have the marketing.And so we had to find a place to put the company. We looked at all of thedrug, pharmaceutical, instrument-type companies and determined that Smith,Kline & French might very well be the best fit. But nobody knew anybody inSmith, Kline & French, and having been in the investment banking business, Ididn’t really want to pay a fee to an investment banker for the introduction.I’d been in that business. So I got out the Standard and Poor’s directory, and Ilooked up all the officers in Smith, Kline & French. It turned out that the vicepresident of marketing was the youngest senior officer they had. So I said tomyself, the youngest senior officer and in marketing in particular is probablythe right guy. So I called his secretary cold turkey and eventually arranged tomeet him, and eventually Smith, Kline & French bought the company. Theonly reason I claim more accurate knowledge than some of the others isbecause they were only peripheral shareholders, while I was on the board atthat point, having inherited Bill Draper’s position, and I was responsible forselling the company. Both company founders, Messrs Corbin and Farnsworth were fine upstanding people, and they made fine defibrillators. Fortunately,Smith, Kline & French could see that and bought the company.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You picked Smith, Kline because you could see that the defibrillator that youwere trying to sell would fit— Bancroft: Their product line. It seemed to be a very good fit with some of theinstruments that they were selling, better than a lot of other companies.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And did it work out for Smith, Kline? Bancroft: Yes, it worked out very well.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I’m reading into what you’re saying that Corbin-Farnsworth was kind of aproblem child before you sold it? Bancroft: Well, it was a problem child only because of the unavailability of ongoingfinancing. Sixty-two to ‘67 was a rotten market, as you’ve heard from others.We couldn’t really take companies public, and there was no exit for thiscompany, and it needed to grow. We had very limited capital ourselves atDraper, Gaither & Anderson. Another company they had was one called Electro-Engineering. I inherited theboard seat from Bill. There was an interesting old Swede, Wally Wahlgren,who had started it and was running it, and he had a plant up in Forestville.DG&A had made the mistake of taking a minority position in a companywhere the founder and chairman owned a majority of the stock—and youcouldn’t budge him. And so I learned from that before I began investingmyself, never [with emphasis] get involved where the individual founder of acompany is running it and where you are completely at his mercy, becauseonce in there’s no way out. I was asked by General Anderson to find an exit,so I did something I really don’t much like to do. Every board meeting I wentto I made myself so obnoxious that he eventually wanted to get rid of me, sohe had the company buy in our stock. [laughter] Bill Bowes characterized itpretty well.DG&A was the earliest, true venture capital partnership on the West Coast inthe form that most venture capital firms are still now run, where you have thegeneral partners and then some limited partners putting up the capital. Thegeneral partners collect a fee, a small percentage of the money invested tocover their overhead, and get 20 percent or so of the profits, to the extent thatthere are profits. That’s been the mold in which most venture capital firmshave developed. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And where did that come from? Who invented it? Bancroft: I think that came out of Ed [Edwin E.] Huddleson, [Jr.] who was one of theprincipal lawyers at Cooley, Godward & Huddleson, San Francisco. EdHuddleson was General Anderson’s lawyer and just a wonderful man.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did he have a model for it in another industry? Bancroft: I think they kind of invented this thing.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Really! Bancroft: I don’t know. By the time I got there the firm had been founded, so I knewabout it. But I just have given him credit because General Anderson alwayssaid he was the sharpest knife in the drawer, as far as being a lawyer wasconcerned. And I thought he was a very bright lawyer who cut through to thebusiness end of things instead of getting lost in red tape.DG&A itself was not really terribly successful. It was a great learning period,and I learned a lot from ‘62 to ‘67 while I was there. Then the firm broke upbecause in the middle of it General Draper really wanted to leave, retire.General Anderson got lung cancer, and so he died in 1967 or thereabouts. Butwe broke up the firm, and it hadn’t really made a lot of money. We did okay,but not by the standards that later developed.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But it did well enough that Pete Bancroft was bitten by the venture capitalbug, right? Bancroft: Very seriously. My main memory arising from DG&A is one of thecompanies we invested in called Mark Systems. It was a little company thatdeveloped a camera, a very high-tech camera, for spy planes, where from fiftythousand feet you could read the license plate of a car in a parking lot below.Of course it was highly classified, and they also developed stabilized optics,where if you hold something you don’t shake, which they now have, tovarious degrees, in all kinds of cameras. But they were an early forerunner ofall this. We invested in them as a startup somewhere around 1962. I put a little bit ofmoney in. General Anderson had the lovely habit of lending money to DonLucas, Crawford Cooley, and myself so that we could make largerinvestments. I put in money at $1 a share, and with some help from GeneralAnderson, I ended up with fifty thousand shares at a buck a share. What really gave me the taste for the venturing business came when I wasdown in Cabo San Lucas with Bill Edwards and his first wife Betty and two orthree other people on a vacation. We flew down in a light plane, and therunway ran from the sea up a hill. You would come in and land at the sea end,go uphill, and figure you could stop by the time you got to the end of therunway. And when you left, you would get to the top of the hill, you’d turnaround, and you’d go like hell down there hoping you’d be airborne by thetime you ran out of runway. But it was a great, great vacation.While I was there Mark Systems had its IPO. It was one of the very fewcompanies that in 1964 went public. I got a telegram saying the IPO wenteffective—that was the term we used in the trade—went effective at $8,opened at $24. It was like many of those young companies when they arebeing well received; the underwriters underpriced it so that the people whobought the stock in the initial offering paid $8, but the extra demand was suchthat it immediately starting trading at $24. Well, I figured if I had fiftythousand shares at $24, that was $1.2 million, so I had made a million bucks,which of course I hadn’t necessarily made, because you couldn’t sell it.[chuckling] But the bug bites pretty hard when that happens.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, that’s pretty dramatic evidence. Bancroft: So I bought a lot of drinks for everybody in Cabo San Lucas.The sequel to that story is, a number of years later a lot of competitiondeveloped and Mark Systems was not holding its own. By this time the stockwas up at $40 a share or so. I had joined Bessemer [Securities] by that timeand was no longer close to Mark Systems. There were investment companiesin the marketplace who would buy investment letter stock, which was stockthat you couldn’t sell except privately, and they in turn couldn’t sell so they’dbuy it at very steep discounts. I sold a big chunk of what I had to one of thesefunds at $30 a share when it was trading at $42, and I never looked back.Unfortunately, some of the people in the company, like so many people in somany companies down there in Silicon Valley, instead of selling a portion oftheir holdings when they could, they’d go to a bank and borrow money basedon the stock’s then value in the marketplace, and buy a boat or a new home orwhat have you. Eventually many of these stocks would go to hell in a handbasket when the companies didn’t proper so well. The people who borrowedinstead of selling would have to pay back the banks in real money, and theydidn’t have the collateral to do it—not unlike houses that today are worth lessthan the mortgage on them. So I saw at first hand what happened to some ofthe officers who went that route, which taught me a lifelong lesson: don’t getoverleveraged. recession with many homeowners under water]. Bancroft: Yes, well we’ve been through several ups and downs in the market since.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Can we call Draper, Gaither & Anderson the first true venture capital firm? Bancroft: I think it was that on the West Coast. American Research & Development,started by Doriot, was first on the East Coast. And there were various familyinvestors—the Rockefellers were investing, the Phippses were, and later JockWhitney, among others.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, but they were private individuals. Bancroft: Yes, but I mean it’s the same kind of business in that they are investing inearly stages of start-up companies. But the true limited partnerships, whereothers would supply the money and the practitioners would be the generalpartners, I think DG&A was the first one on the West Coast, along with Davisand Rock, which started in 1961.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: In 1967, DG&A came to an end. Bancroft: Right, and we gave all the assets back to the people who put money in.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you worried? Bancroft: Was I worried about it?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. You essentially didn’t have a job. Bancroft: That’s fine. You know we’re all optimists in the venture capital business. Ithink you’ve been told that by everybody you’ve interviewed. [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, that’s true. Bancroft: We were sure we were going to find a way to go. I was immediately offeredtwo jobs, one with Eastman, Dillon. I then went east to see Bill Witter, whoI’d stayed in touch with, and he said I ought to go and talk to a guy named Jack [John M.] Kingsley, who was running Bessemer Securities, because theyhad a venture operation. So I did, and fortunately I was offered a job in both.But there was one big difference: at Eastman, Dillon I would have had tosolve both ends of the equation, meaning I would have had to find thecompanies to invest in, and then I would have had to go to the local partnersand get them to agree to invest. So I was both putting the deal together andfinding the capital. Whereas, on the other hand, Bessemer had the moneybecause they were a fairly well-funded private company from whichinvestment funding was always available. So at Bessemer I would only haveto solve one side of the question. I had to convince my boss at Bessemer,and/or the board of directors at Bessemer to make the investment. But if theydecided to, the money was already in place. So I said to myself, gee, I’d a lotrather only have to solve half the equation than the whole equation. So Ijumped at joining Bessemer and moved east.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did Bessemer Securities think of itself as doing risk capital investment? Bancroft: Yes. Bessemer at the time I joined it was worth perhaps $400 million. Andabout 60 percent of it was in marketable securities like their own mutual fund.About 20 percent was in real estate, and the other 20 percent was in so-calledprivate investments, half of which was in shipping in Norway and otherthings, and the other half, or about 10 percent, was in so-called high risk.When I joined to take over their venture capital, I was in charge of what wecalled the high-risk/high-return portfolio.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So they were hiring you as what we would call today a venture capitalist? Bancroft: They were hiring me to be the equivalent of what a general partner is in aventure capital partnership. They were supplying the money, and I wasfinding a place to put that segment of their money, which was the high-riskend of it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Corporations maybe a few decades earlier might have been in securities butwould not have been in risk investment. Is that a new—service isn’t quite theword—a new corporate operation? Bancroft: A new activity. Yes, most of that for most corporations came along later.Remember, I said earlier the Rockefellers and the Phippses and Jock Whitneyand AR&D were among the very few in the East who would undertake to dohigh-risk investments. Laurance Rockefeller started Eastern Airlines. Beforethat there was no high-risk capital available except from a few individualswho were wealthy. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I get it. The question I was trying to ask is, banks, corporations, whatever,looked at what was happening on the West Coast and decided they should getinto venture capital investment because it might pay off? Bancroft: That came along in the seventies and early eighties when the insurancecompanies. For example, Reid Dennis out here was working for Fireman’sFund until he broke away. They were among the few corporations that weredoing this kind of risk investment. In one of your interviews, somebody wastalking about corporations like Intel and others setting up a venture capitalarm. For the most part, their interest in doing it was to fund some developingresearch or products that they might be able to integrate into their own majorline of activity.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It was a different purpose, wasn’t it? Bancroft: Different purpose—which was very true. We were scared to death of havingcompanies like that come in. I’m wearing my venture capital hat when I saythat, because the venture capital part of an Intel or another company was verysmall, and nobody had—that wonderful expression that I’ve known all my lifebut you professed not to know until a year ago—their skin in the game.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, I had never heard it before. Bancroft: Individuals at these venturing organizations had their own money invested andhad everything to lose if the investment didn’t work out. If you don’t havesomething to lose, you don’t pay the same attention that you do otherwise. Sowe never wanted to have large corporations with us in anything we did atBessemer, largely for that reason. It all came to pass a little bit later on,particularly after ERISA [Employee Retirement Income Security Act] came inin the mid-to-late seventies.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, but you went to Bessemer in 1967, and you went to do venture capital.So the powers that be at Bessemer Securities hired you for what I’mimagining is a new activity. Bancroft: They had been doing it; the Phippses had been doing it. Remember Bessemeris just an extension of the Phipps family.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, I see. I forgot that connection. 30 Bancroft: The Phippses and the Rockefellers and Jock Whitney.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But they were unusual, right? Bancroft: Very. How Draper, Gaither & Anderson really got started is because FredAnderson was a very close friend of Jock Whitney’s, and Jock Whitneyoperated a—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So this was going through the family, so to speak. Bancroft: Sure, exactly. That’s really what it was.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It’s not a widespread phenomenon at all. Bancroft: No. Reid Dennis had a slight offshoot because Fred [H.] Merrill, whom hewas working for at Fireman’s Fund, encouraged him to put a little of his ownmoney into the little deals he was finding. That was very rare, very rare.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And nobody worried about the ethics of that? I’m trying to think if there evenis an ethical component. I guess you could argue the opposite: that if you’rewilling to put your own money in, it shows your good intentions. Bancroft: Well, I can give you two good examples, I think, going directly to your point.In the case of Reid with Fred Merrill, the deal was if there was going to beless than a total of $50,000 going into something, Fireman’s Fund wouldn’ttouch it, because the fund was so big that it couldn’t bother itself to invest$50,000. If the investment was to be $250,000 or more, then Fireman’s Fundwanted to take a look at it. If it’s going to be less than that, you [Reid] take it.In the case of Bessemer, the deal I made with them was look, I want to put myown money into everything that I’m bringing to you, and you’ve got to allowme to have a piece of it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That was your upfront negotiation? Bancroft: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: This is what I need to come to Bessemer.  Bancroft: Right, and they said, “Well, why should we do this? Because you’re takingmoney away from what we might be investing.” In other words, “If we’regoing to put $400,000 into a company and you take $25,000 of it, that onlyleaves us $375,000.” And my argument to them was, “Hey guys, wouldn’tyou rather have this little pipsqueak who’s working for you putting up what isa lot of money to him and betting on the same thing that he’s betting yourmoney on? Shouldn’t you feel safer doing that than if I said, ‘Oh I’m going toput your money in, but I’m not going to put any in; I just want a salary?’”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And they bought that argument? Bancroft: They bought that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You now had your own personal nest egg, right? Bancroft: From Mark Systems. I could put $25,000 apiece into the various things Irecommended to Bessemer, and I did.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you think the fact that you were putting some of your nest egg into it madea difference in how you went about investments? Bancroft: Absolutely! If I hadn’t been able to put my own money in, I wouldn’t havebeen interested in doing it, for one.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, but you would have found another situation. Bancroft: But I wasn’t interested in that. I was interested by this time in developingcompanies, because I’d watched Mark Systems, and that’s what I wanted todo. And my condition for doing it was that they cut me in. Now there weretwo stages here of people being cut in. In the first stage, like what I’m talkingabout, Bessemer permitted me to put my own money in alongside theirs. AndI’d get X shares of stock, and they’d get Y shares. They didn’t have thecarried interest of a partnership—that developed through Draper, Gaither &Anderson, and Bessemer didn’t do a partnership for many years, until after Ileft. They allowed people to put money in. The partnership says, in effect, youput up the money; we’ll invest it, and we get 20 percent of the profits, you get80 percent. That’s another way of cutting in the people that are doing thework. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So was your piece of the action then just the fact that you were allowed toinvest? Bancroft: That was all I had most of the time I was there.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And did they put a ceiling on that? Bancroft: No, because the size deals we were doing, I never could compete. [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So they didn’t need to. [laughing] Bancroft: No, they didn’t need to. What eventually happened, the next stage atBessemer was, instead of creating a partnership, they loaned me some moneyto invest in these deals, when we were doing more and more of them as timewent on. So I was using their borrowed money. The arrangement I had withthem was that at the end of the year we would see how Bessemer was doing,and if I hadn’t made my goals for Bessemer, which was another whole issue,then the first thing they’d do was cut any bonus that they were going to giveme, and if I had done worse they would cut my salary.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: There was quite a lot of pressure there? Bancroft: Yes, and you know I thought that was fine, which is part of the reason I’m sodamn mad at all these CEO compensations today. Their companies losemoney, and they make millions. I was always tied to how well I did forBessemer. The better I did for them, the better I did for myself, which seemedto me fair.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that an unusual arrangement at that time? Bancroft: Highly. And that evolved, after I retired, into setting up Bessemer VenturePartners as a true partnership in which Bessemer invested. Bessemer VenturePartners still operates out of Palo Alto. So it has evolved like most of the otherlimited partnerships now.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What would you call the original arrangement at Bessemer? Bancroft: Well, I was allowed to invest with my own money. And if they made money, Imade money. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, but they were going to dock you if you didn’t do well. Bancroft: No, not at that point. They didn’t lend me money until I had been there a fewyears.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, you said that. Bancroft: My first few years, stage one, was I co-invested with them in everything I putthem into. If they made ten times their money, I made ten times on my money.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why did venture capital go the partnership route? Bancroft: The reason it did is because more and more money was being required to gointo companies as the industry grew, and the general partners didn’t have thatkind of money themselves.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. Bancroft: The partnership concept grew so that they could raise many millions ofdollars, and the general partners would get a fee of 1 percent or 1.5 percent. Itfinally got up to 2 or 2.5 of the money you put in, just to operate, to open thedoors in the morning. And if a company was bought for $1 million and soldfor $3 million, that meant there was a $2 million profit, and 20 percent of thatprofit would go to the general partners, and the other 80 percent would go tothe limited partners. That’s the traditional way that these things havedeveloped, and that’s good except that, as with anything, people got greedy,and they began raising more and more money as the industry grew. Theybegan demanding more and more fees. And it finally evolved, unfortunately,to the point where the venture capital partnerships were investing so muchmoney that with the fees they were getting, the 1 percent to 2.5 percent of theassets, that they were making more money that way than they were on theprofits that were being made when the investments were sold. It meant thatthey were really starting to lose sight of really making money on thecompanies they were investing in. Which is why Arthur Rock and others aresaying the world has kind of gone topsy-turvy today—I don’t mean today, butup until recently.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: If I’m understanding you right, venture capitalists operating in this new waywere making enough on the fees so that they didn’t have to worry quite asmuch about the success of the company. Your generation, almost everybody, puts a lot of emphasis on venture capitalists not just investing money—it’salso building companies. Bancroft: Right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Doesn’t a lavish fee structure discourage people from helping to manage thecompany? Bancroft: What happens is you get bigger and bigger and make more and moreinvestments. You don’t have the time or necessarily the degree of interest infollowing progress. Because if you’re getting a big fee each year irrespectiveof what happens—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, that’s what I mean. Bancroft: But you’re getting 20 percent of the profits. If there are no profits, you get noprofits. But that of course works totally against the interests, or should, of thelimited partners who put up the money.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is that problem fundamental to the bubble bursting? Bancroft: I think it plays a very big part in it. Plus the fact that the pendulum alwaysgoes too far in one direction or another, and things go in fads. The market willgo crazy for one kind of investment for a while, and then nobody wants it, andit’ll go back. There are always these swings.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: This is skipping up to the present time but that’s where the conversation tookus, at least in my mind— Bancroft: You’re the leader. [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you think that there is a silver lining to the recession and that people willstart examining behavior? Bancroft: Absolutely, there always has been before, and there is right now. I waslistening the other night down at the Western Association of VentureCapitalists meeting that now there are deals begging. Prices to buy have comeway down because entrepreneurs can’t raise money because the venturecapitalists don’t have any liquidity. Venturers are now beginning to see abetter climate to invest than they have in a long time. So it always goes that way. When we get talking about the NVCA [National Venture CapitalAssociation], I’m going to trace for you the period from ’69 through the midseventies to the end of the ’70s, and we ought to do that in another session.The statistics are fascinating as to what happened and how the industry almostdisappeared and why it came back.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, I want to hear that.I read that Bessemer Securities had something called the anti-portfolio. Doesthat mean anything to you? Bancroft: No. Within Bessemer Venture Partners they used to carve out some moneythat they could invest in public companies that had become orphans in themarket. I’ve never heard the term that you just referred to.After some period of time I changed jobs, and you probably don’t want to gointo that because that’s the latter part of my life where I became president ofpercent or so of the assets were in high-risk investments, and then there wasreal estate that produced ordinary income. The main body of money wasinvested in marketable securities. Bessemer is owned by a number of trusts,the beneficiaries of whom are members of the Phipps family. The way itworked was that the venture capital or high-risk portfolio was supposed togenerate the greatest compound rate of return. That’s what it’s meant to be,and if it doesn’t do it you ought to get fired, and if it does you get a pat on thepopo. The real estate created a lot of the income because they were mostly init for income, and you got dividends from the marketable securities portfolio.The older members of the Phipps family get the dividends each year.Whatever capital gains are made is reinvested so it will grow for futuregenerations. So that was the operating motif of Bessemer.And you know, all during the time that I was there in charge of the high-riskinvestments, we were generating a return of around 30 percent a year on thatpart of the portfolio, which was a much higher rate of return than you get onreal estate or on marketable securities. The challenge I always was given wasthat every year I ought to be able to increase—this is after I was president—the net income of Bessemer which is paid out to the beneficiaries by a rategreater than inflation. And every year I should increase the underlying valueof the stock at a rate greater than the growth in the S&P 500. Those were thebogeys that I had.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You made those the criteria? Bancroft: Well, I agreed to them when they made me president and set me up. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So they were setting them and you were agreeing to them? Bancroft: Yes, we were negotiating it. But that was my bogey, and that was how I wasbasically compensated, or not. I was telling you earlier about how they couldcut into my bonuses and salary.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did that ever happen? Bancroft: No, actually that was one of the reasons I retired when I did as president, in1988, because I’d had eleven or twelve straight years of its working well, andI thought gee, I’m not sure I can keep this up forever. [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Get out while the getting’s good. Bancroft: Besides I was getting old enough. I really by this time wanted to work formyself rather than work for somebody else. So that’s why I stepped down.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How was it to shift from Draper, Gaither & Anderson to Bessemer? You weretrying to adapt, I would think, to a whole tradition of investment through thePhipps family. There must have been a long history of expectations. Bancroft: Yes, well, they were a corporation, Bessemer Securities Corporation. Thepresident was a fellow named Jack Kingsley, and I worked directly for him.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So the Phipps family was in the background? Bancroft: They were the directors, and behind them the shareholders. So we had anumber of Phippses on the board with whom I interacted. The chairman ofthe board was always a member of the Phipps family, but they always had anoutsider as president. Henry Phipps, when he set it up in the beginning, saidhe wanted to have this thing set up to run for the benefit of his heirs. Theyshould always supervise what was going on with their money, but that it wasbasically better to have a stranger running the company because it’s a loteasier to fire a stranger than it is to fire a cousin, which is absolutely right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And maybe a little distance is good too. Bancroft: Yes. So they had a long history. Jack Kingsley was not a member of thefamily. I worked for him until he retired, and then for his successor, Tom Keesee, for a couple of years, and then they made me president. So then I hadthe venture capital group working for me the last twelve years I was there.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, you certainly moved up the ladder. Was it more than year after year youwere bringing in good money? What were they looking at? Bancroft: Why did they make me president?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. Bancroft: The guy who had been made president, my immediate predecessor, was notworking out to their satisfaction. They had offered me the job after JackKingsley’s retirement, but I said I really didn’t want it because I was veryhappy running the venture capital end of things. They then said two yearslater, when things weren’t working out with Tom, “Well, if you don’t want it,we’re going to go on the outside and hire somebody to come in.” At thatpoint, I had been there from 1967 through until 1976, and I had several peopleworking for me in the venture capital end; I had my entire net worth investedin that part of the firm. I was frankly scared to death that if they broughtsomebody in from the outside, he might not understand the culture, and hemight want to do something on this venture capital end that I didn’t wanttinkered with. So I said okay, I better take it. So that’s why I accepted the joband became president.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. Now you were into yet a whole new realm of endeavor in a sense. It’sthe same company, yes, but you’re now president, so how did you get up tospeed? Bancroft: Well, I knew a lot about marketable securities because I had been in thesecurities business on and off all my life. I didn’t know much about realestate, but I thought there was a very good man there who could run the realestate, and a guy that was not so good that was running it at the time. That waswhy my predecessor ended up retiring. So as soon as I got in, I got rid of theguy who was running the real estate and put in the gent I thought could do agood job, and he did a very good job. So you basically delegate.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you do that easily—fire people? Bancroft: I never fire people easily; that’s been a very difficult thing to do. Butdelegating I don’t mind. To me there’s a difference between delegating andabdicating. If you delegate, you want to keep an eye on what they’re doingand stay in close touch. If you abdicate, you say okay it’s your baby, you run it, and I never believe in abdicating. But see, I became president during theCarter years, and I thought Carter micromanaged the whole bloody countrypractically to a standstill, which we’ll talk about when we get into this other—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, but he came up with some policies that you must have liked. Bancroft: Congress did; he didn’t.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, well, true. Bancroft: Anyway, I didn’t find it difficult to delegate, and I had to, unfortunately, getrid of a number of people who had started companies that we invested inbecause they couldn’t grow with the companies. My favorite story about thatis: you start with a string quartet, and the lead violinist is the leader, and youplay wonderful music. But as you grow and develop an orchestra, you’ve gotto bring in other instruments and other help, and the leader of the stringquartet often cannot grow into becoming your conductor. At that stage of thegame you’ve got to find a conductor or else, to use my favorite expression,you end up with cacophony instead of a symphony.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But it seems to me that critics could have said that about Pete Bancroft. Bancroft: Sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because up until now, you’ve had responsible positions, but they’ve beenpretty well defined. And now you were head of the show. Bancroft: Well, if it hadn’t worked, I’m sure they would’ve gotten rid of me.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, but I imagine you also had to learn some new skills. It was not enough toknow venture capital now. So what happened? How did you do it? Bancroft: I learned, I guess I learned, because it worked! [laughter] If you’re capable ofgrowing and willing to grow and eager to grow, you do. And I had a downsideto protect, which was I had Bill [William T.] Burgin and Neill [H.]Brownstein running our venture capital at that point. And I had anotherseparate venture capital operation in Brad Mills, the person that I originallywent to Honolulu with to do the study way back in Eberstadt days. They werebeing provided money by Bessemer for new investments, into which I wasalso investing, and I wanted to be sure that they continued to keep being provided the money. I knew that I understood the venture capital fieldbecause I had been in it a long time, and the other was frankly easier, Ithought. We had good people running marketable securities, and I knew wehad a good man able to run the real estate, so it was just a question—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you delegated. Bancroft: Yes, absolutely.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you think you were breathing down the necks of the people running theventure capital operation because that had been your baby? Bancroft: The question is did they think so—and the answer is no. Because at one stageof the game after I became president, they said, “You know, something mighthappen to you, and we may be better off forming a partnership, a limitedpartnership, like all the rest of these folks have, because if something happensto you and your successor doesn’t like us, Bessemer might not go on investingwith us.” So I said, “You’ve got a point.” I went to Dinny [Ogden Mills]Phipps, the chairman, and I said, “These guys would like to consider settingup a partnership so that there are outside investors besides Bessemer.” Hesaid, after a lot of thought, “Okay, if they really want to, we’ll go that way.”So I went back to them and said, “Guys, okay, if you want to go out and findoutsiders to invest, and if you think they’ll be as easy to work with asBessemer, we’re willing to go that way.” And they thought about it and cameback and said, “No, we don’t want to”.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh really. Bancroft: Later on they formed a partnership after I retired.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why did they say no? Bancroft: Well, when they were told they could, they were empowered to be able to.The reason they then didn’t is because they were perfectly happy with thearrangement with Bessemer, because if they had good investments to make, Iwas always able to get the money from the board for them. Now, had theymade bad investments, I wouldn’t have been able to get more money from theboard, and had we done enough of those, the board would have had my head.Very simple.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You were there twelve years— 40 Bancroft: Yes, as president. I actually joined Bessemer in ’67, and I retired as presidentin 1988 and stayed on until 1992.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh right, it’s longer than twelve, isn’t it? Bancroft: Yes. I had twenty-five years with them.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It’s the second interview with Paul Bancroft III, better known as Pete. And itis April 7, 2010. We’re going to focus this time on venture capital per se,having spent the first interview on your previous career. I’ll start with theclassic question which is, what do you consider to be the most importantaspect to look at when you are considering a possible investment in acompany? Bancroft: Oh, I think really much the same as everybody else: the people and the qualityof the people and the qualifications of the people are really the thing thatmatters the most. Like almost everybody else in the field in the early days andstill today, I spend a lot of time with the entrepreneur, or would-beentrepreneur, who comes in seeking investment—trying to learn what makeshim tick, trying to learn about his ethics and his drive and his motivation andhis abilities and his qualifications. And, almost as important, has he got ateam? And if he does, how do they blend and mesh with him? When it all comes together, then you look at the business plan. Actually to beperfectly honest, you usually look at the business plan first to find out whetherit makes any sense or not. Somebody who writes a business plan that has himdoing $1 million in sales the first year and $100 million the second year with a50 percent profit margin clearly has never run a business and isn’t qualified torun a business. So if that’s the kind of business plan that we get, why weusually say goodbye to them before even going on. But assuming the businessplan makes sense, then the people are terribly important.The other thing is the size of the potential market. If you have somebodywho’s going to spend years designing the finest gold-plated widget that everhappened, but when it is designed and ready to go there’s only a market forten or fifteen of them, clearly that isn’t something that any venturing companyought to back. So I think in the early days you needed to be reasonably certainthat the market was at least $100 million potentially and hopefully severalhundred million.  And then when you get through the people and the market and the businessplan, I guess the next thing is you check out the technology as best we could.Like many of my fellows in the field, I was not a technologist, so we’d have togo find somebody to— As I used to like to say, has this person reinventedKleenex? Or has he really got something new? And then you want to checkthe potential competition. Who else is out there? Is he in the forefront? If thereare already three companies engaged in this technology, you probably don’twant to back a fourth one; it’s better to have the first or the second in the field. You put all of those things together and spend as much time getting to knowthe person as you can, and eventually go home and sleep on what you’velearned. I used to wake up at four o’clock in the morning, and somethinginside would either say okay let’s go with this, or no, I don’t think so; we’dbetter turn it down. Eventually the decision is made based on one’s instinct,and of course what is your instinct except the sum total of all your experiencesin your life. If you make a bum investment, hopefully you learn and yourinstinct gets better the next time around.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you get better over time? Bancroft: Well, I hope so; we had a pretty good record.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you flooded with business plans, some of which you probably didn’t getpast the first page? Bancroft: Yes, that all depended. Back in the days when I was really doing this in thesixties and seventies when I was at Bessemer, we would probably look atthree hundred proposals a year, and we might invest in three or four.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Really. Bancroft: Yes, we had a pretty good choice, and I think that’s important because I’veknown some individuals who— Somebody comes along and sells them on aconcept, and if it’s the only one they’ve seen, they’re likely to think it’s greatand go into it, and they have nothing to compare it with. It’s always veryimportant to be able to check out this proposal against some other. You don’tever really make an investment unless you’re convinced going in that the guyhas a great chance of making it, or that his company or team does. But on theother hand, it was certainly my experience in the early days, and probably stillis, that out of every ten investments you make, there are going to be two orthree that go belly up. And there are going to be a number in the middle, kindof the living dead; you might make a little; you might lose a little eventually. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is that pretty true across the board? Bancroft: I think so. Some people, I think Reid Dennis probably had, at least he believeshe had, a better record of winners versus failures. But I think it’s generallytrue that out of every ten investments you make, there’ll be two or three thatwill do really well, and of those, one or maybe two will make many times onyour money—enough to make up for the losses you incur on the other ones.But you think they’re all going to win when you go in, or else you wouldn’tgo in.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is there any common denominator, in your experience, of what goes wrong? Isthere one piece that is more likely to go wrong than another? Bancroft: Oh I think by and large it will be the failure of the founder or chief executiveto be able to deliver what he had thought he was going to be able to deliver.Another hurdle comes several years downstream. I have always likenedfounding a company a little bit to a string quartet where your founder mightbe the lead violinist, and he can operate and make very wonderful music, butonly with three other people. As the music grows, or as a company grows, andyou need, in the case of a company, additional financial help, manufacturinghelp, personnel help, other things, you’ve got to spread out and hire morepeople. At that stage of the game, the leader of the company has got tobecome more like a symphony conductor or an orchestra conductor than likethe leader of a string quartet. And unfortunately a number of them don’t makeit. That is usually the next most critical thing that comes along in the earlystages of building a company. One would hope, and I always hoped, as did all of my compatriots, that if thefounder was not going to be able to make it as a conductor, you couldconvince him to go back to the laboratory and invent the next generation ofproduct, stay with the company, stay on as chairman, but bring somebody inwith a business background to run it. And sometimes we’d be successful anda lot of the time we wouldn’t. That was always very sad because the foundersby this time would get mad and think that they knew how to take the companyto the next level, whether their board believed it or not. As often as not, they’dleave in a huff and sell their stock prematurely, which always was a shame.And I think there’s not a one of us that didn’t feel that one of the very few badaspects of our job was when we had to get rid of a guy we’d backed. Becauseyou get to like them all; you get very close to these people.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And it was their idea in most cases too. It was literally their baby. Bancroft: Absolutely. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you have any clue what percentage of companies that you invested in overtime in which a founder had to be forced out or moved to a different positionin the company? Bancroft: I think in a great many of them either that happens, or if you can’t quite workthat, you merge the company into a larger company so that they get absorbed.The main thing, eventually, from the viewpoint of my board of directors atBessemer was: how was the portfolio performing? During the time that I wasthere—and it’s been going on since for the most part—we would tend toaverage in the venture capital portfolio; longer term, a rate of return of about30 percent compounded per year. That was a lot better than the rest ofBessemer did. But remember, only 10 percent of Bessemer was in venturecapital; the rest of it was in marketable securities and real estate with a lowerrate of return but more safety. We were the high-risk portfolio, and we wereexpected to take large risks and hopefully have large returns. Themeasurement is not on any one or two companies; it’s really on how theportfolio does over time.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Pete, were you alone pretty much making the decisions about whichcompanies you would consider? Bancroft: Well, in my first year or two there was just me. And then after that I wasfortunate enough to hire two people, Bill Burgin and Neill Brownstein, tocome in, who were each thirteen years younger than I. But we began buildingup a team that way.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And they’d had financial background? Bancroft: They had had, in each case, a financial background. It really was a wonderfulexperience because I convinced my boss, who was at that point president ofBessemer, that I really needed some help. And so I interviewed a number ofpeople, including both Neill and Bill; they had totally different backgrounds.Neill was working for Ned [Edgar Francis] Heizer, [Jr.] out in Chicago, andBill was with one of the banks, a bank analyst in Boston. I couldn’t make upmy mind which one I wanted so I went to Jack Kingsley, who was my boss,and said, “Hey boss, could you interview both these guys and help medecide?” So he did, and about a week later I got together with him, and I said,“Well, what’d you think?” He said, “I think you ought to hire them both!”[laughter] I did, and they worked together in the same office for a while andthen in different offices. Eventually Bill stayed East, and Neill came out toCalifornia. But really that was the early make-up of our venture activities.And there was another fellow named Bob [Robert H.] Buescher, who had been with Fairchild Camera and who was a big help in terms of helping usstay organized. He was sort of our administrative partner, if you will.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were these four people, you included, coming at things from a slightlydifferent perspective? How uniform was your approach? Bancroft: Yes, we’d interview the people, talk to them. Eventually, in the early stageswhen I was still running just the venture capital, I would make a decision thatI wanted to do it, do the write-up, and take it to my boss who was president ofBessemer. If he approved, I would take it to the monthly board meetings ofBessemer as a whole. I always thought it was funny because we were talkingabout very small investments by their standards, of several hundred thousanddollars per investment, and they were used to dealing with a lot of money inthe marketable securities. But of course everybody got intrigued with thishigh-tech stuff that we were doing. Often in our monthly board meetings Iwould find myself spending more time than was really deserved for theamount of money I was looking for. But everybody kind of was interested inthis high-risk end of the business.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you raising a fund? Bancroft: No, I did not do a fund in the historical sense. Bessemer had a big pool ofmoney. At the time I joined them and became president, they had about $400million and—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That was set aside for risk investment? Bancroft: No, about 10 percent of that was set aside.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I was going to say, that’s a lot of money. Bancroft: No. They had a pool of revolving funds. They were cashing out of things andgoing into things all the time. And so I would just draw on that pool. If theboard approved the investment, then I’d just draw on the pool for funding.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you doing pretty well from the very get-go? Bancroft: Yes, I had pretty good luck from the beginning.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Bessemer could have done without a venture capital branch, could it not?  Bancroft: It certainly could.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Had they been doing any of that before you appeared on the scene? Bancroft: They had had one person in there doing it in a modest sort of way before I gotthere. There was a fellow named Peter Brooke who ended up going up toBoston and joining Tucker, Anthony. Charlie [Charles L.] Lea, [Jr.], whoended up being a very close friend, was at Bessemer when I first ran intoBessemer. I was trying to sell Bessemer on investing in a company that I wasin out here in Draper, Gaither & Anderson. Charlie Lea didn’t like thecompany; he thought it was a turkey, but we became very close friends andhave always stayed that way.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was Kingsley the one to convince that venture capital should be an ongoingaspect of Bessemer? Bancroft: Well, yes, broadly, but really on a deal-by-deal basis that we ought to begoing into this one or not going in. He was very good. I only recall beingturned down once for an investment that I went to the board with, and that wasmore for political reasons than for any other reasons. So I really had a veryeasy time with it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I understand that in the classic partnership form of venture capital all it takesis one general partner to nix a deal and it doesn’t happen. Is that indeed true? Bancroft: I think that usually is true. You see, after I left, Neill and Bill did the primaryventuring investments. And then after I retired in 1992, they eventuallyformed a partnership, and Bessemer Venture Partners has grown and is runnow very much like everybody else. They have an office down here in PaloAlto, and I think they still have one in the East. I’m not really very close tothem anymore. But it’s run more like a traditional partnership now.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It sounds to me before that happened, while you were still active there, thatyou had a lot of power in your hands. Bancroft: Well, in that particular area our board was either going to believe in the thingsthat I wanted to invest in or not, and if they hadn’t, presumably, they wouldhave gotten rid of me. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that always in the back of your mind? I mean, that could be a greatanxiety-maker. Bancroft: Well, I was always, number one, optimistic, and number two, I was puttingwhat little money I had in side by side with them. So if I didn’t think it wouldwork, I wouldn’t have volunteered to put my own money up, and if I hadn’tdone that, I wouldn’t have asked them to go in.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: This is a terribly general question, but what can you say about the personalcharacteristics that go into the average, if there is such a thing, venturecapitalist? Optimism—you’ve certainly mentioned that several times. Bancroft: You’ve got to be optimistic, and you’ve got to enjoy what you’re doing sowhen you wake up in the morning and look in the mirror, you’re smiling andlooking forward to the day, which is part of being optimistic. I think having areal interest in listening to what people have to say—you’ve got to be a goodlistener. I find if the venture capitalist does all the talking, he doesn’t learnvery much about the people he’s thinking about investing in. Very importantto listen and very important to compare the person you’re talking to with theother people you see and judge who looks and feels like they have themakings of making a real company. Eventually it becomes instinct if you do itoften enough.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, instinct, intuition. Bancroft: I lump the two together, synonymously<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You spoke of waking up at four o’clock in the morning and deciding, this dealseems to me to work. Bancroft: Yes, what you’re doing is distilling the sum total of what you’ve learned aboutthe company and the people. You’ve gotten to the point where you don’t thinkthere is a whole lot more you can learn, and you might as well make up yourmind: are you going to make the investment or aren’t you?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: The term ‘due diligence’ that some people bandy around, are therepartnerships that put heavy emphasis on that? Bancroft: Oh I think everybody does, however you want to call it. Everything I’ve saidto you about what I tried to do in looking at a company is, in fact, either doing due diligence or vetting it, to use the term of art. But that really is what youdo. You get to know as much as you can about what they want to do andeventually decide whether you want to make a bet on them or don’t want tomake a bet on them.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you think everybody uses personal assessment to the degree that youhave? Bancroft: Well, from what I’m told by my friends, yes. [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Don Valentine talks about market, market, market. I know that there are otherthings that go into it. Bancroft: Absolutely.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It’s obvious that from person to person there’s going to be a slightly differentweighting of what he or she pays attention to. Bancroft: Of course. I don’t know Don at all well, but from what I have gathered, hismain focus was on the market, and his main focus has been if the companycan’t make it, less hesitancy to change managements more quickly than someof us. For others of us, the market is very important because if you can’tperceive it as being big enough to build a decent size or large company thenyou shouldn’t go in. Reid Dennis was very people oriented; Don Valentine ismore market oriented. So we each come from where we come from.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: The other thing Don Valentine emphasized, and I don’t want to make him thecomparison all the time, but he was so strong about it, is the importance ofoperating experience, which of course he had had, and I don’t believe youhad. Am I right in that? Bancroft: No, I did not have any myself.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you feel that ever held you back? Bancroft: I often felt that had I worked in a manufacturing or another kind of company,it would have been good. I also felt that had I gotten a master’s degree inbusiness administration it would have been good. But I didn’t, and it workedout okay. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I would say so. Bancroft: In the case of Measurex—it was one of my very early investments after I gotto Bessemer; as a matter of fact, it was my first one—what I really liked wasthat Dave [David A.] Bossen had been the general manager of at that pointtheir only competitor, a company called Industrial Nucleonics back in Ohio.He had left it and had come out to California looking for a company that hecould run. So he had the experience of having operated a company. He raninto Bill Draper out here, and Bill was the first one to get to know him, andthen Bill introduced him to me.Dave outlined for me on the back of a napkin how he was going to build hiscompany. We talked about the people, and he had a wonderful sales manager,Chuck Worthley, who had been with him at Industrial Nucleonics comingalong. He had a guy named Gene Anderson who was technically very bright,who had been with a company out here. And he had a fellow named Erik [B.]Dahlin who had been with IBM; he was a Swede and a brilliant technologistwho understood clearly and had worked in the technology that Dave wanted touse. So I felt he had, really, the makings of a very good team. But in order toform the company, he needed $1.3 million. The group out here, the people hehad been interviewing at that stage of the game in late 1967 and the beginningof 1968, they were used to making $25,000 and $50,000 investments andpooling them together, and they didn’t have the kind of money to reach intodoing something that large. So Dave came back to see me, and I thought itmade a great deal of sense. We agreed to put in $400,000, which was the keyinvestment to get the rest to come together.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, and that was a lot for that era, wasn’t it? Bancroft: That was a lot, a lot for that era. But Bessemer had slightly bigger pocketsthan the individuals in the group in California. It turned out to be a wonderfulinvestment because Dave was one of the people who was able to ride throughthe transition and build Measurex to being really a very substantial, goodcompany, and didn’t merge it out until he was ready to retire. He was one ofthe very few who could go from the beginning all the way through. Arthur[Rock] talked about that rarity. Intel was another one. You had Bob [RobertN.] Noyce and Gordon [E.] Moore and the rest of them in there. They had awonderful team of people. The CEO would change as time went along tobring in people who had more expertise in one area of the business thananother, and Intel has become a magnificent company.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Quite a collection of talent there at the beginning.  Bancroft: Yes, but when you’re in the beginning, you don’t know what’s going tohappen.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You didn’t know the company would succeed, but you could tell somethingfrom Noyce and Moore’s track record. Bancroft: They had done it at Fairchild Semiconductor before.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Exactly. Bancroft: Well, as Arthur said in his interview—it’s the only investment he’s ever madewhere he was 100 percent sure from day one that it was going to be winner.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And wasn’t it just a handshake sort of thing? Bancroft: Oh yes, sure! I was trying to get in on that action, but no way. Arthur knewthem all very, very well, and he had that one all sewn up. So I got a little pieceof it, but not very much. [telephone interruption] Bancroft: One other thing I should say that’s interesting: venture capitalists early on andprobably still today have a different opinion about another thing. There aresome who believe that if you invest in a very bright group of people, and iftheir first set of products doesn’t work, they’re smart enough and good enoughthat they can change up and develop a whole new line of products and besuccessful as a company. Whereas there are others who look more to theproduct and the market, and I think Don [Valentine] would be in thatcategory.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Would you be willing to go the first way? Bancroft: Yes, depending on the people and the reason. I mean that’s another thingabout California, which we can get to when we talk about the differencebetween California and elsewhere. People are willing to dare greatly out here.To make a mistake is a learning experience, not a death knell, which it is inmany countries and many other parts of our own country. So making amistake can be a learning experience, depending on whether the people arelearning or not. 50<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You mentioned that you had to go elsewhere to get an assessment of anyparticular technology. Did that mean that over time you had quite an array ofexperts that you could call upon? Bancroft: Yes. I would take them on as a consultant for a few days to analyze what thesepeople were doing and then to give an opinion.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So your lack of specific technological background in A, B, C didn’t become aliability? Bancroft: Well, I think if I’d had an engineering background like Reid [Dennis] had, itwould have been better. But I didn’t, and so I sought to make up for it bygoing out and finding people who could evaluate whether this technology wasgood or not.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I assume you mainly invested in high-tech companies, right? Bancroft: That’s really what we’re talking about out here. We did some other things thatweren’t high tech, but most of them out here were that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So these were techie types that made pitches to you and I guess your board? Bancroft: No, not the board.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Just you? Bancroft: Yes, it never got to the board except for my write-up after I’d decided to do it,and I would go in to them for an approval or a disapproval.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So that’s different, isn’t it, than the way it goes with most venture capitalpartnerships? Bancroft: Yes, because we didn’t have a partnership. To the extent that Neill and Billand I would thrash things out, we’d talk to each other and help each otherdecide.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I imagine that even a business plan got pretty technical, did it not?  Bancroft: It could, and if I couldn’t understand it, I would try to get them to explain it tome in English. [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, they had to be able to translate. Bancroft: Yes. To be successful in business, you have to be able to communicate, whichmeans reading and writing and talking in the English language coherently andbeing able to convince people. You know, you’ve got to be a salesman ofwhatever you’re doing in order to sell it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I understand that that’s become kind of an art, that there are seminars andtutorials on how one presents a business plan, that sort of thing. But I’mthinking that back in the sixties it must have been much more ad-lib. Bancroft: We were going by the seat of our pants. I participated in a panel up at Yale atone point, and one of the questions from one of the students was: what coursesor course should I take at Yale to best prepare me to be a venture capitalist?And I said, “You want to take Daily Themes and English so that you can learnto read, write, and talk in the English language, because if you can’t sellyourself and communicate, you’ll never get anywhere.” And that’s far moreimportant than the technology—the technology comes later.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because you can get that other ways? Bancroft: You can pick it up from other people.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That probably surprised the person asking the question. Bancroft: It did. The dean of the college came up to me afterwards and said, “Thankyou, because we fancy ourselves as being a liberal arts university. All of thesekids want to get too technical too fast, and we really want them to get theirbasics before they do that.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I was going to ask you, and maybe you’ve already answered it by thevery fact that you were not a partnership. But is there any other way that youlook upon how you operated that was different than that of your colleagues? Bancroft: Not really in terms of the investment process and making the investments.Instead of the investments being in a partnership, they were in one corner ofBessemer’s asset pool. But our modus operandi was really quite the same as with the other partnerships. What did develop over time, and I rememberhelping early on with some of my confreres in New York, was getting themset up to have an appropriate carried interest, meaning to get a percentage ofthe profits you make for yourself and your group. Early on, well, as I told youbefore, in Bessemer they didn’t have that, and I had to convince them to letme invest.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, right. Bancroft: That’s how I did it. But over time, it eventually developed into a partnershipform whereby the money that would go in to be invested would provide to thegeneral partners of the partnership a percentage interest in the realized profits,which is the way all these partnerships really grew. Draper, Gaither &Anderson, as I think I said last time, was one of the early ones out here. Thatformat was designed by a lawyer named Ed Huddleson at Cooley Godward inthe early days, and that whole concept of the way partnerships work stillpretty much continues. It’s gotten embellished over time.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I read that the few firms that have a 30 percent carry sometimes cause dissentamongst their limited partners. Did you ever run up against that? Bancroft: Well, I used to hear about it periodically. It used to be that you would have anannual fee of 1, 1.5, or maybe 2 percent of the money invested just to payyour bills. And you would get 15 to 20 percent of the profits. Then over aperiod of time it changed, and they began to get from 2 to 2.5 and sometimesup to 3 percent of the assets as an annual fee, and 20 to 25, up to 30 percent ofthe realized profits. Most of them that did that, that I know anything about,didn’t stay that way for very long, particularly after the market started tanking,which we’ll talk about when we get to the NVCA. But I think the standard isstill pretty much 2 and 20: two percent of the money going to pay foroverhead annually, plus 20 percent of the profits if there are any.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Which when you have huge fund is quite substantial. [chuckling] Bancroft: Well, that was how things unfortunately changed, because in the early dayswe were investing pretty much our own money and money of the people forwhom we were directly working, like the Phippses and the Rockefellers andJock Whitney’s company—and Arthur [Rock] out here, and Draper, Gaither& Anderson. But eventually, as the industry grew, a lot of insurancecompanies and funds were investing rather larger amounts, and the venturecapitalists at that point were suddenly finding that they were managing moreand more and more money, and those 2 and 2.5 percent fees became pretty bigmoney. Eventually they got to the point, I think, of going too far. The pendulum always goes too far. They were all trying to raise more money sothey’d have bigger funds to manage, which of course means that you can’t beas selective in what you’re putting the money into. Therefore the quality of thedeals was going down, and the corollary of that was that they’d begincompeting with each other.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Are you thinking of the 1990s bubble? Bancroft: No, I’m thinking—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Even before that? Bancroft: Yes, I’m thinking of starting really to build up in 1980, and then increasing allthe way up. I felt as we got closer into the nineties and the 2000s that whatwas happening, what I consider merchant banking, was infringing itself uponventure capital. More and more people were taking commissions for things,getting fees for things, for managing these huge amounts of money. Thereturns for the limited partners weren’t nearly what they were in thebeginning, which they can’t be if you’re not being as selective as you used tobe. So then the pendulum would go too far, and the money would dry up.We’ll get to that in a minute.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It’s almost self correcting, isn’t it? Bancroft: Yes, basically, sure, and should be.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You mentioned wanting a piece of Intel and Arthur took it all— Bancroft: Well, Arthur and his group.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, there wasn’t room for you. Bancroft: Not for Bessemer, but I was offered a very small piece early on.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did Bessemer usually syndicate, I think is the word? You weren’t the soleinvestor—or did that also happen? Bancroft: No, we were always for the most part, even from the earliest times, havingother people co-invest with us. It wasn’t a formal group, but just like Arthur had his group that was investing with him, we had people that we regularlyinvested with. If we took a major piece of the deal, we would bring otherpeople in for the rest of it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was it a select group? You had a tried-and-true collection of people orinstitutions that you could bring in? Bancroft: It tended to be that way because it would become self evolving. Whensomebody asked you into his deal, and you worked well with him, you’d turnaround and ask him back into your next deal.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Does it work that way now, Pete? Bancroft: I don’t really know. I think now people have so much money that many ofthem are trying to grab off the biggest piece of it, and I think it’s far morecutthroat and competitive. We never had that in the early days. We nevercollected any fees. In allocating our investments, one person would take thelead, and one time it might be Bessemer, and one time it might be somebodyelse. You develop a group that you like to co-invest with, so you call themfirst. And so it evolves over time. But we never had the competition thatdeveloped after that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It sounds a bit like a gentlemen’s club. Bancroft: Yes, it was.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: People that you knew and trusted, and you could be fairly sure that next timearound you’d be let in. Was that, in general, the way it was? Bancroft: Absolutely. At the time we formed the National Venture Capital Association,there were only thirty-seven organizations in the country that we felt werevalid venture capitalists. And we all knew each other pretty well. She didn’tdefine what she meant went into being a venture capital partnership. Karen Southwick, The Kingmakers: Venture Capital and the Money Behind the Net, JohnWiley & Sons, 2001.  Bancroft: Yes, well there are a lot more now than even that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: When you were lead investor, was there the assumption that it would be youthat would go on the board of the company that you were investing in? Bancroft: In the early days, I would go on the boards. After Bill and Neill came in,eventually I would get— You know, you can only handle so many boards at atime. I would get one or the other of them, whoever had taken the lead inmaking the investment for us, to go on the board, and I would not.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Can you give me some idea of what kind of advice you were giving? Iimagine that it was less about the technology/science and more about how youdevelop this company. Bancroft: Yes, a lot of it was really having ongoing intimate contact with the chiefexecutive, because the leader of the company often can’t talk to his ownpeople, and he’s got to have a sounding board. Well, we would try to be thatsounding board as an outside director. So a lot of it was listening. If theywanted to launch a new product or do something, did it seem to make sense?Or I’d at least ask all the questions I could think of to make him think aboutwhether it made sense. And then when it gets to the exit strategy or raisingadditional money, why presumably we could be of some significant help.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: If the entrepreneur is heavily invested, and I mean that emotionally as well asin terms of his or her career in the company, as I imagine the great majority ofthem were or it wasn’t going to work, am I correct in thinking that it could getvery emotional? Bancroft: Very.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How did you handle those occasions? Bancroft: You’d try your best to get him to look at the reasonable side of things, andeventually if it didn’t work, it sometimes got to the point where you’dconvince the other members of the board of that company that a replacementwas needed, that the job had outgrown the person.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So a lot of psychology, dealing with personalities.  Bancroft: It’s very important, and you know sometimes we ourselves in the field wouldgo nuts. You fall in love with your own company. I remember one loser I hadthat I kept chasing until I practically got an ulcer trying to keep it alive.Finally one of my partners at Draper, Gaither & Anderson, back in the earlydays, came to me and said, “You know, you have not only walked the extramile for these guys, but you’ve walked an extra four miles. Why don’t you letit go?”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you in love with the people or with the business? Bancroft: I was determined I wasn’t going to lose. [laughter] I thought they were goingto succeed.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: No losers on your roster. [laughter] Bancroft: But I lost it all there, and on several others.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: There’s a lot to this, isn’t there? It’s not a black-and-white decision to arrive atthe right time to say, “Okay. Enough. I’m going to cut this tie. It’s too bad, butthat’s the end of you.” Bancroft: There’s not a one of us in my position that isn’t likely to say that wheneverthey’ve made a decision to make a change, they’ve always waited six monthstoo long. You just don’t want to give up and make a change. You do have tobe careful that you don’t fall in love with your own companies.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How much time do you suppose you were spending on nurturing thesecompanies? A lot? Bancroft: Oh yes. When I was running the venture capital part, most of it was spent withthe companies that I was invested in. Early on, I spent time looking for newones, but later on I let Neill and Bill do most of the work in developing thenew investments.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You mean time above and beyond the formal board meetings? Bancroft: Well, now you’ve got two kinds of board meetings. The board meetings of thecompanies themselves— <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That’s what I mean. Bancroft: They would usually meet monthly, and they would usually be all-day affairs.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But you’d be on the phone in between, wouldn’t you? Bancroft: Oh yes, quite often.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So another reason why you couldn’t be on too many boards, right? There justweren’t hours in the day to handle them all. Bancroft: That’s right. And then starting in 1974 when they made me senior vicepresident of all investments at Bessemer, I had to begin easing back from thepurely venturing side. Then when I became president in 1976, I had to stepway back. From then on I was just really investing in the companies that wewere doing. But I was picking up most of my information from Neill and Billbecause by that time I was responsible for all of Bessemer’s investments. Iwould have been giving short shrift if I had spent all of my time on 10 percentof them.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Venture capital, it goes without saying, is risky business. Bancroft: It’s supposed to be.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Risk with the hope of high return. Did you have strategies for reducing risk?Was there anything formulaic about it? Bancroft: The main thing was, don’t make just one investment; spread your risks amonga number of companies because some of them are bound to fail. By spreadingyour risks, you have better odds of the portfolio as a whole doing well.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Are we talking about tens of different companies? Bancroft: Well, I used ten because it was a convenient number. For the most part, wewould have thirty to forty companies in the portfolio at any one time, indifferent stages of development. Some being ready to exit, and some startingin fresh. But in the early days we’d make three or four investments a year, andthen of course it stepped up as time went along. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I imagine that an IPO took a lot of your time, right? Bancroft: Yes, but anytime a company got into trouble or had a fire, as we liked to say,it demanded a lot of time. We always had the feeling that you could manageone fire at a time. You maybe could manage two; but if you had three of yourcompanies blowing up at once—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You must have had some say about the timing of an IPO, right? Bancroft: Oh well, yes. But I mean that depended largely on whether market conditionswere ripe for an IPO and whether the company had matured to the point wherean investment banker was prepared to take it public.Often either the company’s not ready yet or it shouldn’t go public. Maybe itought to be merged instead, because once you do an IPO, you’re out there,standing on your own feet and have some public shareholders that you areresponsible to. I think there’s a moral responsibility not to take a companypublic until you think it has matured enough that it can stand on its own feet.And of course there are other times when you can’t do an IPO because themarket simply won’t buy it. I’d love to get into that discussion when you letme talk about the National Venture Capital Association, because that’s whereI have some statistics.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, maybe that’s where we should go. But are you happy with what we’vesaid about your approach to doing venture capital? Bancroft: Sure, I think so.Well, the reason I think the NVCA’s important is because it shaped theindustry in the early years. In late 1973, we were very aware of the fact thatthe climate out there, taxwise and otherwise, was getting worse and worse. Afellow named Charlie Smith, who was then at the Rockefellers, and I gottogether and had lunch. We said we really had to get ourselves down toWashington and find a way to do some lobbying to get some tax relief. Atthat point the income tax rate was 49 percent, and it didn’t matter whether itwas on capital gains or on ordinary income. We also realized that if we triedto send a representative of the Rockefellers and the Phippses and JockWhitney down to Washington, we’d be laughed out of town on a rail becausewhy do these rich fat cats need help? So we decided we’d better try to getorganized and get all of the people who were significant players in the venturecommunity involved. We could write them out on the back of an envelopebecause we knew most of them, but there was nothing formal. So later in1973, we got together at O’Hare Airport in the Red Carpet Room, Charlie Lea, Ned Heizer, and myself. In one or two of those meetings, Lionel [I.]Pincus was involved and Peter Brooke and Dave Morgenthaler.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Are these people from all over the country? Bancroft: These are people, at that juncture, primarily from the East Coast and Chicago.Ned Heizer was from Chicago. Dave Morgenthaler was from Cleveland.Anyway, we wrote up a preamble to what the NVCA ought to be and then gotit formed. We hired a fellow down in Washington by the name of Stan[ley][M.] Ruble to be our first executive director. So we formed this organization;we got thirty-seven members to join, and we put together a board of abouttwenty. We then decided that we’d better get some research. The MITDevelopment Foundation had recently done a wonderful study on very youngtechnology companies such as Digital Equipment, Data General,Compugraphic, Marion Labs and National Semiconductor, comparing themwith innovative companies such as Polaroid, 3M, IBM, Xerox and TexasInstruments—and with older mature companies such as Bethlehem Steel, duPont, GE, General Foods International Paper, and Proctor & Gamble. We gotthat study and wrote it up in our own way as a “white paper” to circulate inWashington. We called it “Emerging Innovative Companies: An EndangeredSpecies.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now this was in the mid 1970s? Bancroft: [The following few paragraphs contain some additional statistics and factsadded in editing by Mr. Bancroft from the white paper referred to above].The paper came out in 1976; we had formed the NVCA in late 1973. But whatwas happening down in Washington was that several factors were conspiringagainst the growth of young businesses in the U.S. In 1969, for example, therewere 548 IPOs or Initial Public Offerings of companies who had net worthsprior to the offering of less than $5 million. These small companies raised$1.458 billion in 1969. That was the height of the former market before theincreased taxes and business climate change really began to drain theeconomy, resulting in a market downturn. By 1973 IPO’s were reduced frombillion raised four years earlier. And in 1975 there were only four companiesable to go public, and they could raise a total of only $16 million. So therewas really no market out there for young companies. You were talking a fewminutes ago about an IPO and when do you do it. Well, if there isn’t anymarket, there’s no way to exit. The same thing has happened in differentcycles. And we are going through the same thing now, starting in 2008. 60 We found from the MIT study and included in our white paper some of thesesalient facts. Despite the fact that the market was drying up for youngcompanies, and that fewer and fewer people were investing in venturingcompanies, nevertheless, the companies themselves were doing somewonderful things. MIT compared 1969 with 1974, and during that five-yearperiod, the largest, most mature companies used in the study hired only25,000 people, whereas the innovative companies hired 107,000 people, andthe young technology companies hired 34,000 people. So we have aphenomenon of companies having more and more trouble raising money togrow, but these are the companies that are hiring people. And interestingly,more than that, in 1974 the largest companies in the study paid $1.5 billion intaxes, but the innovative companies paid $2.3 billion in taxes. So theinnovative companies were paying more than the largest companies, becausethe largest companies were hiding behind all their tax shelters, and theyweren’t really hiring people. The jobs being created and exports and salesgrowth were coming from the young technology companies and theinnovative companies. Over the five year period 1969-1974 the compound annual growth in sales ofthe mature companies was 11.4% compared with 13.2% for the innovativecompanies and 42.5% for the young technology companies. The compoundannual rate of increase in new jobs was .6% for the mature companies, 4.3%for the innovative companies and 40.7% for the young technology companies.Finally, the compound annual rate of increase in provisions for income taxeswas 7.8% for the mature companies, 8.5% for the innovative companies and34.1% for the young high tech companies. So we had this fascinating phenomenon that the young companies the venturecapitalists were investing in were really doing quite well, but they were allstarved for money because the market was drying up. And so we then startedgoing down to Washington and publicizing this paper.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How did you do that? Bancroft: Well, we had hired Stan Ruble as our executive director. He pointed us in theright direction of which congressmen to see and which of their assistants tosee.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So this was kind of a one-to-one thing. It wasn’t as though you were making apresentation to a subcommittee. Bancroft: Very much so. No, we’d go down and deal with them one at a time until wefound somebody that liked us. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Using this economic argument. Bancroft: Yes, and Ed [Edwin] Zschau, who along in there was a congressman fromSilicon Valley, was a big help. But the key guy was a fellow named Bill[William A.] Steiger who picked up on this, and he decided that somethinghad to be done about capital gains taxes. Eventually we got through thepercent to 28 percent, and then on down to 20. Eventually it got down to 15,where it is now, until Mr. Obama gets an increase next year. [tape change] Bancroft: Okay, just to continue with this thought—the Steiger Amendment got passed,and the law got changed in 1978. Remember, there were only thirty-sevenventure capital companies when the NVCA started, and in 1973 those thirtyseven firms had the availability of about $600 million total to invest. Rightafter the tax laws were changed in 1978, confidence in growth began to returnfirms to 95 venturing firms with $4.1 billion to invest. And in 1998, the 25thbillion under management, and in that year alone over $10 billion of actualinvestments were made by these firms. So there was this huge change-upduring the twenty-five-year period in which the NVCA had existed, and it allcame about because taxes went down so that investing in young companies forcapital gains was encouraged. It once again became worthwhile to investlonger term in companies that were creating jobs and growing, so that wewere basically able to change the economy around.I was looking at something the other day: in 1999 there were 3,649 separatecompanies that received $48 billion in investments. This was in the venturingarena. Two hundred and seventy-one companies backed by venture capitalistshad IPOs raising $23.6 billion in 1999, and the overall market value of thosecompanies that came out of the venture capital community on the date of theirIPO was $136 billion. So, this little tiny group was able to have a tremendous impact on theeconomy, and it really was all due to being able to bring the tax rates backinto line so that people would dare to take the risks. Because not everybodywas making a 30 percent return on their portfolio. As a matter of fact, asthings went along and you had more and more competition, the rates of returngot lower and lower and lower. But the venture capital community in its earlyyears really chipped in. Reid Dennis and Dave Morgenthaler spent a lot oftime back in Washington talking to congressmen and trying to get them tounderstand the economics of backing younger companies because they’re theones that are creating new jobs. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I remember Reid Dennis talking about Morgenthaler. Was he a venturecapitalist? Bancroft: Yes, Dave Morgenthaler was one of the founders of the NVCA with me. Hecame from Cleveland. He had Morgenthaler Associates, his family venturecapital company, and he had his kids in it. When we formed the NVCA, wemade Ned Heizer the first president and then chairman. Then Charlie Lea wasthe second president and then chairman. I was the third. Dave Morgenthalerfollowed me, and it kind of went on and on, and the organization grew fromthere.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Would it be correct to characterize NVCA, at least in part, as a lobbyingorganization? Bancroft: Yes. Basically a lot of the work they did was to go out and try to convincecongressmen that they shouldn’t be too hard on capital gains taxes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: To this day? Bancroft: Absolutely.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: In that late 1970s period, you were also tapping into a concern, particularly atthe Washington level, about the state of the American economy and the placeof American competition on the international scene. Everything was goingdownhill. Bancroft: Sure. Well, we had President Carter from ‘76 to ’80, who tried tomicromanage the country. He has been, in many of our opinions, a far betterformer president than he was an active president when he was there. [laughter]Reagan came in, and Reagan was very pro-business, and so there was thishuge turnaround. Industry, of course, took off and technology took off. Andwe see until recently a climate that is so totally different from what Iremember in the ‘70’s, because we were always struggling to find the moneyto put into the companies.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: The ERISA Act [Employee Retirement Income Security Act] loosened theinvestment criteria for pension funds, so you not only had the lowering of thecapital gains tax but also a loosening up of sources of funding.  Bancroft: Right. It was very good in that sense. The other thing that unfortunately cameout of it was the taxing of stock options, which was harmful to the people andthe companies.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And did that happen about that same time? Bancroft: I’ve forgotten just when it came in, but it was through that period of ERISA.To me the good part about ERISA was allowing institutions to not worryabout the Prudent Man Rule in investing a portion of their assets in high-riskinvestments. The stock option thing was really a shame, because what you’redoing there, if you get options to shares at $1, and you exercise the optionswhen the stock is at $10, under the newer rules you would have to payordinary income taxes at the time you exercise the option even though youdidn’t have any cash. Because all you’re doing is exercising the option andgetting the shares, but you have to sell a lot of what you get in order to pay thetax. Then what you have left grows at a capital gains rate. But the practice outhere, particularly here in Silicon Valley—less so in the East—was to try andempower almost all your employees by giving them stock options, so thateverybody felt a piece of ownership in the companies. I think that was a vitalpart of why Silicon Valley grew and is still growing.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Congress was just trying to— Bancroft: Get more money. But it’s kind of dumb to try and take money away when youdon’t have any cash. So you force somebody to sell what hopefully is a goldengoose that they’re working on to help their companies grow.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you part of any battle there? Bancroft: I was not by that time. I basically set up the [NVCA] retirement program rightabout 1980 or thereabouts. We had gotten pretty well entrenched with ourfounding directors, and a lot of them were beginning to look upon being adirector of the [National] Venture Capital Association as being a sinecure forlife. And of course the industry was growing very fast, starting in 1980, and itbecame very important to get new, young blood in. So I led a movement toestablish a three-year limit on being a director, and then set up three classes sothat we had the class that was retiring in one year, and then the second year,and then the third year. And when you retired, you had to get out of theorganization, or at least off the board. And since I was one of the founders, Idecided to set myself up to go off the board in the first year, so that I couldturn to my fellows who were less interested in retiring and say, “Come on guy.I’m doing it; you can do it, too.” So we set up a class system, and that has held true since, and it’s been much to the benefit of the NVCA because theynow have broad membership. But I moved out of the NVCA at that point.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Can any venture capitalist or organization belong to the NVCA? What are themembership qualifications? Bancroft: I don’t know what they are today, but I would think anybody with areasonable pool of money and saying he’s a professional venture capitalist,they’d probably welcome in.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Are there annual meetings? Bancroft: Again, I don’t know what’s happening today. I do know they have at leastannual meetings, because I came to the one in 2008 where they invited all thepast presidents of the NVCA, and it was here in San Francisco. We haveanother one coming up this May where I’ve been asked again, and they’regoing to throw some award my way [The NVCA American Spirit Award]. Sothey do have that, but the work goes on all year round.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Are you happy with NVCA coverage? Do you care to say anymore? Bancroft: No, I think that pretty well covers the early days of it, which I wanted to besure got covered because of all the people that you have interviewed so far, allof whom are from here [northern California]. Reid [Dennis] was the only whowas active back in Washington during the period I’ve been talking about.Now, in recent years, Dixon Doll was the head of the NVCA two years ago,and somebody from the East is in now, but he’s going to be succeeded by ayoung lady out here, Kate Mitchell, whom I met the other night. So it is nowfully national in scope. But in the East we had most of the people that werewilling to go to Washington and take the time in the ‘70’s because New Yorkis a lot closer to Washington than San Francisco is. So in the early days mostof the water was being carried by folks from the East.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, shall we move to regional advantages? Bancroft: Sure, sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What is your view of the Bay Area in specific, and Silicon Valley even morespecifically, in the development of venture capital? Why here?  Bancroft: Several reasons. First of all, you had two seats of learning at Stanford and Calthat had a lot of technology available. Secondly, you had a fellow named Fred[Frederick E.] Terman at Stanford who was the father of trying to gettechnology companies going out here. I think he was the one that inducedHewlett and Packard to start Hewlett-Packard in the garage. Also, throughStanford they began leasing out a lot of the land to companies to start doingthat. The climate, of course, is very important because so many people inWorld War II and in the Korean War coming from other parts of the countrywould go through here and see what the climate was like, and when they cameback they didn’t want to go home to their snowy winters. I don’t know what it is now, but it used to be in the early days there weremore people living in California who were not born here than who were bornhere. They all came from someplace else, and they all had the gumption to getup and leave their settled communities in the East where they had family andfriends and knew everybody and could have stayed comfortably for life, andcome out here to dare greatly. To me California has always been a place todare greatly, starting with the Gold Rush. I of course knew about it from myearly history at the Bancroft library, and the fact that my great-grandfather[Hubert Howe Bancroft] came out during the Gold Rush. I’ve always felt thatCalifornia was the go-to place to get things done. As I said a little bit earlier, you weren’t scared to make a mistake here; you’ddust yourself off and start again. All these people would communicate quitefreely with one another in these different companies and trade ideas, and itwas just a great place to be. Of course, we had a wonderful school systemwhen I grew up. It’s gone to hell in a hand basket now, for the most part. Ourtaxes are now very high, and the state is on the verge of going bankrupt. But itwas a classic case for good educational availabilities, lots of companiesstarting up, lots of jobs, go out and dare greatly in the Promised Land, and Ithink far more so than Route 128 around Boston. There’s a little bit of it downat the University of Texas in Austin because [George] Kozmetsky, who wasone of the founders of one of the early companies—Scientific Data Systemsthat Arthur Rock backed—moved on down. He’s dean of the University ofTexas in the technological area and has done a lot in the Austin area. What’s happened in recent years is that because of the taxation and the highcost of living out here a lot of companies are offshooting some of theirmanufacturing and other things, both to the Far East and back to Texas orNew Mexico or Arizona or elsewhere. But California’s still a magnet fordrawing people, and I don’t know how much longer it’ll go on. It all dependsupon whether the business climate gets changed or not. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I think it was Bill Draper who talked about how large a presence people fromelsewhere are in Silicon Valley. He was particularly, I believe, thinking of theIndian presence. Bancroft: Absolutely. Well my daughter went to Stanford undergraduate, and then shewent to San Francisco State for her master’s, and then to Cal for her PhD.When she got her master’s from San Francisco State, I went to thatpercent women and about 75 percent Asian! [chuckling] It was very, veryclear who was getting educated and taking advantage of it. And of course nowthere’s so much going on in India that a whole lot of people from India arecoming here and going back home. It’s all going to change, but I don’t knowhow.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you have any strong opinions about Sarbanes-Oxley? Bancroft: I think they went too far. I’m not an expert on it, because I’m really no longerin the loop. But it seems to me that, as with any well-intentioned legislation,you go too far and ruin the spirit of the good folks.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Meaning too much reporting and— Bancroft: Yes, too much reporting, too much paperwork for small companies who can’tafford the overhead.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you think Sarbanes-Oxley has contributed, maybe only in a small way, tothe recession that we seem to be now coming out of? Bancroft: Yes, I think anything that promotes government interference you have to lookat pretty carefully. Obviously, we need some regulation because there arealways bad guys that go too far in any direction. But you don’t want to throwthe baby out with the bathwater, and there’s too much regulation and toomuch proposed regulation that may be throwing all the babies out with thebathwater.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is Pete Bancroft veering towards the libertarians? Bancroft: Oh, I’m pretty libertarian. [laughter] <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You mentioned Route 128. You are a prime candidate for comparing East andWest, having been born and educated largely on the East Coast. Is there anymore you care to say? Bancroft: We had a number of investments at Bessemer along Route 128. Of the boardsI was on, at least a third were up that way. So, yes, we were quite active upthere, and it’s a fine community. I don’t think it has had the same verve andenthusiasm that you get out here in Silicon Valley. But they did a very nicejob because Harvard and MIT kicked in, much as Stanford and Cal did herefor technology backgrounds for entrepreneurs there.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: MIT these days is very entrepreneurial, is it not? Bancroft: Very. And you’ll find with Charlie Lea and some of the people that are havingbecause they’ve really focused on it. Bill Burgin, who worked for me, is backup in Boston now.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Does he talk about the difference? Bancroft: Well, I haven’t talked to him much about it recently.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: This area that we live close to is, as you say, not risk averse—you failed inthis company, well, pick yourself up and try another. Bancroft: Well, I think the key is leaving your settled community to dare greatly, and ittakes a certain kind of personality to do that. There’s a lot of it going on in theBoston area, but I think people are more conservative there than they are here,and, you know, who’s to say that’s bad.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you want to say anything about your philanthropy? Bancroft: Well, if you’d like. I’ve set up—about eleven years ago—a family foundationin which I had all seven of Monica’s and my kids, of whom only six are stillalive, involved as directors and involved in the foundation. I have always felt,to use that wonderful expression that you didn’t know when I mentioned itlast time, that you ought to be investing in things where you have some skin inthe game. So I have encouraged all my kids to give some of their time toorganizations to whom we are granting money, to give to local charities whoare small enough that our grant will make a significant impact on the organizations and to take some time to work with them. I think the workingwith them is quite important, both for my kids’ benefit and for the grantee.And that’s worked very well over ten years, eleven years now. I also feel that when my time comes, I want to be sure my family is well takencare of. But any excess beyond that point I am going to have added to thefoundation so it will continue to grow over time, and by then they will havehad many years of experience in operating it. We have foundation meetingstwice a year, and it’s a wonderful opportunity, because I start them all outinitially by having each person take five to ten minutes to bring everybody inthe family up to date on what they’re doing, thinking, aspirations, hopes,problems. It’s a great way to stay in touch because they are all over thecountry, and so it’s just wonderful when we get them together. That wayMonica and I can learn what’s going on! They seem to enjoy it, because theykeep coming back for more. One of my sons has become the president of the foundation, so he is more andmore taking charge of what it’s doing. But the nice thing I like, having hadeleven years where the founder is still around, is we’ve been through most allof the problems you can go through: marriages and bringing spouses onto theboard, divorces and getting rid of spouses, that kind of thing. The only thingthey haven’t had yet is the loss of the founder, and I hope that’s still a fewyears off.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, we all do. Bancroft: But I’m very pleased with it. Again, it’s operating in a microcosm; it’s stillquite small. Monica and I do a number of things for some of the local charitiesor the opera and the symphony and that kind of thing. I know that Reid Dennisand Pitch Johnson and others have been very active in running that. And Ithink that’s terrific. But what I really wanted to do was have the foundationstart as being down and dirty where people would be contributing their time aswell as the money we had to give.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And all six really do? Bancroft: Yes. Oh, it goes in different stages. They’ll get interested in a project locallyand work with it until it works its way through. Then if they get busy withfamily or work they still come to meetings but they drop away as sponsors.Which is fine. And we’ve got the grandchildren now involved increasingly.And you know, I don’t care whether each of the kids wishes to sponsorsomething or not—it’s available. I have found that they all have, at one pointor another, come in and picked up on a project and worked with it for a while.And then they move and times change. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, is there anything you would like to add in conclusion? Bancroft: [Added by Mr. Bancroft during the editing process.]I do want to say a little about the Bancroft Library at UC Berkeley. It is aspecial purpose library, much like the Beinecke at Yale. My great grandfatherfirst came to California as a bookseller with a consignment of books when hewas nineteen years old. He was quickly bitten, not by the gold bug, but by therealization that well over 100,000 people had poured into this sleepy state,which had contained only 7,000 non-Indians in 1847. In just a few years, all[immigrants] looked to get rich, and because of the gold were able to buyclothes, food, and all life’s requirements—in short, to immediately establish aflourishing market economy and fast growing cities in San Francisco andelsewhere.He became intrigued with this. He came to realize that he was witnessing thelast march of western civilization, growing from nothing to become a majorpart of the country in just a few short years. He began collecting everything hecould find written about first California, then the whole western part ofAmerica. Eventually, he and a group of helpers wrote 39 volumes of history,and he completed his major efforts by selling his library to the University ofCalifornia in 1905. The library has continued to flourish until this day. WWhen we moved out here for good at the beginning of this century, my wife,Monica, suggested that in our personal charitable interests we had given agreat deal to Yale over my lifetime and that it would be an excellent time forme to return to my roots and begin seriously contributing to the BancroftLibrary and to its future. Her timing was perfect, for the Library was just thenlaunching a campaign to finance the retrofitting and expansion of its facility.I took her advice and, with the enthusiastic support of Charles Faulhaber, thewonderful director of the Bancroft, participated in the renewal of the Libraryand have been delighted to have such close ties with it these past seven years. I think that covers everything I can think of to say at this time.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I certainly thank you. I should add in closing that the only reason I’mhaving the privilege of talking with you is because you were the one who hadthe idea and supplied the backing for this series on venture capital. I am verygrateful to you. Bancroft: And I in turn am very grateful to you for taking charge of running it. No, Ithink it’s been a good thing to have, and I think it will be a fine repositoryover time for research for people who want to learn about the early years ofthe venturing business, because it really started out here in the early 1960s. 70<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, and you were a big part of that. Bancroft: Anyway, it’s been fun working on it and fun doing.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I’m glad, and I thank you for all of it. 
