Interviewer: It’s January 13, 2009! Dennis: Right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Happy New Year. Let’s start back with your family. Dennis: One week from a major change in our country’s well-being.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That’s right. I know. That’s quite a historic transition. Dennis: Yeah, and it is. All right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Tell me about your parents and where you lived and what it was like growingup in that family. Dennis: Family background. Well, starting with my grandparents—my grandfather’sname was Chester Weaver, and he came to California, I think, in 1898. Theylived in La Porte, Indiana. My mother was eleven at the time of the SanFrancisco Earthquake in 1906, so that would indicate that she was four or fiveyears old at the time that he first came out here—five or six years old. Theycame out to visit, and his brother worked for the Studebaker Company in SanFrancisco. Studebaker had factory branches that were owned by the factory.Of course they were selling horse-drawn wagons, and Studebaker’s bigbusiness, which grew up during World War I, was in military wagons drawnby horses. A lot of people don’t know that John Studebaker actually started inPlacerville, California. Did you know that?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: No. I certainly didn’t. Dennis: He started in Placerville making wheelbarrows for the miners! And he didbetter than a lot of the miners did looking for gold. They all neededwheelbarrows, and so that’s what got John Studebaker started, and then hewent back to South Bend, Indiana and got into the wagon business, and soforth. Well, my grandfather’s brother said, “Chester—how long are you going to behere? You’re just visiting.” And Chester allowed that they might stay two or three months. “Well, what are you going to do, Chester? You can’t just sitaround the house for two or three months. We’re going to put you to work!”So he put him to work in the wagon business while he was here and then lateron they moved to California. I don’t know just exactly when they moved, butshortly thereafter. And then the brother got sent up to Portland, Oregon, and Chester Weaverfound that he was in charge of the Studebaker branch in San Francisco. Heused to tell me a story which was really sort of a very interesting story. He hada friend back in La Porte who was starting a business. The friend said,“Chester, you know I really need some financing and I’d like to sell you halfof my business.” And Chester said, “Well, how much money is half of yourbusiness going to take—how much would it take to buy half your business?”And his friend said, “Well, how much do you have?” And he allowed thathe’d saved $13,000 working in his father’s bank. And $13,000 in the mid1890s was a lot of money. And his friend said, “Well, that would be enough.That would be enough.” Well, the friend’s name was Harvey Firestone. But my grandfather didn’t doit. And he decided not to do it, and he used to tell me later on, he said, “Youknow, Reid, if I’d done that we would have had to live in Akron and insteadwe came to California and I’ve had a wonderful life out here and just haveloved California. So he and Harvey Firestone remained very, very closefriends as long as they were both alive. But I remember that $13,000 numberbecause it’s sort of critical. Then my mother and father were married, I think, in 1916. My father hadworked for General Electric; he was an electrical engineer. But after hemarried my mother he left General Electric and went into the automobilebusiness. My grandfather said the biggest decision he ever had to make waswhen Studebaker divided the highly profitable wagon business and the highlyunprofitable automobile business into two sections, and you had to decidewhich one you were going to go with. He wrestled with that and finallydecided he was going to go with automobiles.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you know why? Dennis: Well, I think he went with automobiles primarily because it was the newthing. And he had maybe more vision than some others. If you take a look—Ihave some interesting tapes that are the words of Harvey Firestone butnarrated by somebody else. Harvey Firestone talks about the fact that the NewYork bankers thought that the automobile was a fad that came over fromEurope—that the automobile was really not going to survive in the UnitedStates—that the horse and buggy was a much more reliable proposition. Sothese companies had a lot of trouble getting financing back in those days. Firestone had a tremendous amount of trouble getting financing. And it’shard—we’re so married to the automobile today, it’s hard to imagine it. But at any rate—and then as Studebaker got more and more involved withWorld War I and the wagon manufacturing for that, they decided to get rid oftheir factory branches, so they sold—I don’t know what the arrangement was,but at any rate, my grandfather ended up buying the Studebakerdistributorship for California, Oregon, Washington, and Honolulu—theHawaiian Islands and the Far East—so he had a big territory. My father diedwhen I was seven. I really do not have any recollection of my father at all.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But he was an engineer? Dennis: He was an electrical engineer. And my grandfather, who did not go to college,sort of took me under his wing and we were very, very close. They lived aboutseven blocks away from us in San Francisco. I was born in San Francisco; Iwas raised in San Francisco and we lived close by. They had an Irish cookwho made absolutely wonderful pancakes on Sunday morning. So I would geton my bicycle on Saturday, late afternoon, and run over to their house, stayovernight, so I could join them for pancakes the next morning and then weoften would go driving on Sunday, down the peninsula here. He loved to keeptrack of things that were going on. But he sort of drilled into me that I wasgoing to go to college and I was going to become an engineer. This was backin the days when you did what your parents and grandparents told you to do.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And why did he pick engineering? Was it because his son had done that? Dennis: No, no, it would be his son-in-law that was an engineer.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh that’s right. Dennis: Sure, it’d be his son-in-law that was the engineer. No—he was a veryconservative individual, as a lot of people were at that time. He was scared todeath of Franklin Roosevelt and the New Deal, and he said, “Reid, about theonly thing that we can leave you that they can’t take away is a goodeducation.” He said, “I want you to go to college and I want you to become anengineer and then I don’t care what you do. You do whatever you want withyour life, but you always will have your engineering to fall back on and theycan’t ever take it away from you. That was the philosophy at the time. Well, you know, I got my first electric train when I was seven years old and Iloved playing with electric trains. I liked modifying them; I liked coming upwith new circuits. I would take them apart, and I can remember they came out with a new reversing mechanism for Lionel trains. I had some old engines thatdidn’t have this automatic reversing in them, so I went down and I can stillremember—I think it cost me $2 to buy the little relay mechanism that wasinstalled in the newer models. So I bought one of these things—I went homeand took a couple of trains apart, took the one apart that had this in it and tookthe one apart that didn’t have it in it and was able to match up the wires andput it all back together again, and by God it worked! And I can remember in high school I used to sit in—well, I was heavilyinfluenced by the San Francisco World’s Fair in 1939-1940 because the SantaFe Railroad had an absolutely magnificent display of model trains goingaround and around in one of these—it was much nicer than the SouthernPacific display, but the SP display was all right too—but the Santa Fe displaywas huge. And in these day, I was now—what, thirteen years old or so, and inthose days you could—I could walk down to the street car, take the street cardown to the Ferry Building as a thirteen-year old and get on the ferry boat. Mymother would say, “Just be back by six.” And I’d go over and spend the wholeday at the World’s Fair all by myself. There was no concern about safety ofyoung people or anything like that. I would spend most of my day alongside the Santa Fe exhibit watching thesetrains go by. It was a panorama of the western scenery that you might run intoin New Mexico and stuff. These trains went around and around and around,and I watched the little three-color light signals change from green to red andthen back to yellow and then back to green, and then the next train wouldcome by and it would go to red. Once I got into high school I spent a lot of my time in study hall sitting therewith a pencil designing new signaling circuits for electric trains. So I alwayshad this sort of—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I can see that. Let me ask you—with your father dead at a young age—whathappened to your mother in terms of supporting the family? Dennis: Well, my grandfather took very good care of us, and she owned a building indowntown San Francisco called the Physicians Building on Sutter Street thatgave her some income and it was primarily—I think the family was veryfortunate to have the financial resources to get through the Depression withoutany serious problems. I had an older brother and an older sister, so there werethree of us in the family. My mother never remarried, but really it was, I’dsay, the automobile business and my grandfather’s work at that that supportedus through the Depression. One of my favorite keepsakes or mementos is a pocket watch that I have witha very nice chain that I only get to wear when I’m all dressed up in black-tie or something. Just before my grandfather died, when I was over at hisapartment and he called me and he was in bed, he called me in and he wasperfectly lucid, but he said, “Reid—I’ve got two watches here, and I’m goingto give you your choice of them, and I’ll give the other one to your cousin.And one of these,” he said, “this one came from the Studebaker Companyafter twenty-five years of service.” And he says, “It’s probably the betterwatch. But the other one came to me from the motorcar dealer’s associationand it’s inscribed in the back ‘in 1922, upon his completion of ten years ofactive service as an officer of the association.’” He said, “This one was givento me by my competitors and it’s always meant a great deal to me.” So I havehung onto that watch. [with emotion] So obviously, as you can tell, I was very close to him, and as we say, we did,in those days we did, generally, what our parents and grandparents told us todo most of the time.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You said you have an older brother and sister. Had your grandfather more orless picked you out as the one to try to inspire? Dennis: Right. Well, my older brother was a little bit more of a loose cannon and hedid go to Stanford. I think he may be the only person in history that’s beenkicked out of Stanford three times in a row! [chuckling] He either bowled hisway out twice and skied his way out once or else he skied his way out twiceand bowled his way out once. He loved the sports and stuff, but he was not avery good student, but he was a very charming guy. My sister did go toStanford and completed the four years and was happily married right at theend of the war and happily married for a long, long time. But they are all gonenow. I think that my grandfather took a special interest in me—number one becauseI was there at what he considered to be an impressionable age. And I lovedthose pancakes, so I’d get over there frequently. It freed up my mother to dowhatever she wanted to on Saturday night and Sunday and stuff, so she likedthe idea. She spent a lot of time working for things like the infant shelter inSan Francisco and other good works like that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Where did you live in San Francisco? Dennis: Well, we lived on Locust Street in San Francisco and just very near LaurelVillage, but over the hill so I could look out over the San Francisco Presidioand see the Bay and Alcatraz, and I could watch the ships come and go in andout of the Golden Gate. We had a house that was four stories and myplayroom was on the fourth floor, so I had this big, huge window looking out the room—it was a very large room and it was filled with electric trains, butone end had this big window. But my grandfather would call me and sometimes on the weekends thedirigible [USS] Macon, which was stationed down here at Moffett Fieldwould be floating over the city, and so he’d come over and grab a hold of meand we’d get in the car and we’d go chase the Macon around from hilltop tohilltop, watching this wonderful, wonderful dirigible fly over the city. And then his friend—Moore, I can’t remember—Moore Dry DockCompany—I’ll think of it—I’ll call you at about midnight tonight and tell youhis first name! But at any rate, a friend ran the Moore Dry Dock Company andhe’d call him when they were building the Bay Bridge and he’d say, “Chester,we’re going to be lifting sections up off the barges this afternoon,” at such andsuch a time. They pre-fabbed a lot of these big sections of the Bay Bridge atMoore Dry Dock over in Alameda and Oakland and then would float them outthere at slack tide or ebb tide, whenever it was when the tide wasn’t movingvery much, they’d send cables down and hoist these things up in to positionon the Bay Bride. Well, we would—my grandfather would grab me and we’d go down and we’dgo up to the top of that hill by the bridge where the big apartment house nowput up a big tower; for a long, long time it was there, just an advertising tower.Well, we’d go sit up on top of that hill and watch this process. So he just—sometimes we’d come down the peninsula to see how much waterwas coming into the Spring Valley lakes because they’d just opened theaqueduct from Hetch Hetchy, and I think we were there for the openingceremony at the Pulgas Water Temple. He just was interested in those sorts ofthings, and so he would get me involved in it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was it a given, with two siblings, that you would go to Stanford? Dennis: Almost—it really was, in that my mother’s two closest friends were Don[Donald B.] and Mary Tresidder, and Don Tresidder was president ofStanford. Mary Tresidder was Mary Curry of the Yosemite Park and CurryCompany and Don Tresidder was president of the Yosemite Park and CurryCompany. During the war, 1942 and ’43, the summers of ’42 and ’43, all of the eighteenyear olds were off to war and it was the first time Yosemite Park and CurryCompany had allowed sixteen year olds to work during the summer. Theyneeded summer help up there, obviously. And so, in effect, I got my first jobfrom Don Tresidder, and I worked at the stables during the summer. I workedon the burro picnic. It was a wonderful division of labor—there was a young woman there that—her job was to take of the kids on the burro picnic and myjob was to take care of the burros on the burro picnic. And so that’s the waywe worked, but rode a horse and took them down the valley to this picnicand ’43. And then in May of ’44, I became eighteen and the navy—this carries on partof the training—the navy—I wanted to volunteer for the navy and you had tovolunteer before you were eighteen, or else once you turned eighteen youwere subject to the draft. But if you were going to volunteer for one of theother services, you had to do it before you turned eighteen. The navy had atest called the Eddy Test. They badly needed radio technicians and radartechnicians, although we didn’t really even know about the existence of radarin those days, but they called us radio techs. You could take this test beforeyou turned eighteen, and if you passed it, the navy would say, “Young man, ifyou volunteer for the navy, we will, number one, we’ll let you finish highschool, so you can go back and graduate,” which was only about three or fourweeks in my case. But “Number two, we will guarantee you that if you comeinto the navy you will go into radio technician training.” And we went in withthe rank of, I think, first class seaman, which was a step up. Anyway, I passedthat test and so I went—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What was it? Physics and mathematics? That sort of thing? Dennis: Yeah, physics, mathematics, and particular spatial relations. I rate very, veryhigh in spatial relations. If you give me a whole train of gears and you tell meyou’re going to turn this one one way, I can tell you which way this one isgoing to go. I can figure it out. I’m not clairvoyant, but—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you think that’s from your railroad {unclear}— Dennis: It’s from interest in mechanical things. It’s interest in mechanical things, and Ihave a very good friend in the venture business who said, “Reid, you reallyshould have been a mechanical engineer, not an electrical engineer.” Well, Idon’t know about that, but I love, not mechanical things—I love innovation!You know, and I love—it’s absolutely fascinating to study the whole field ofinnovation. In some of my talks when I talk to young people I say, “Numberone, you should realize that innovation is nothing new.” And I wait for that tosink in for a while, because of course innovation is something new! It is and itisn’t, but there’s a wonderful double entendre there—but I’ve often claimedthat innovation goes back a long, long way. I think that Adam was the firstinnovator, when he picked up the fig leaf. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Maybe Eve handed it to him. Dennis: Well, I don’t know—I wasn’t there. [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Just a thought. Dennis: But at any rate—could be, but nevertheless, it became Adam’s innovation, Ithink. And it’s wonderful to go back and study the innovations of George andRobert Stephenson in England, as steam came along. It’s absolutely amazingto me that with the first steam engines that were developed in England, theyused to heat up the boiler and get the steam to get the piston moving in onedirection and then they would spray cold water in there in order to get it tomove in the opposite direction. Well, if you can think of a more inefficientthermal situation than that, I can’t imagine what it is. And then Stephensoncame up with this idea of putting a valve on the outside that would allow youto introduce some new steam on the other side of the piston. So there are allsorts of innovations and it really is sort of fun to try to explore these thingsand figure out is there a newer and better—is there a different and better wayof doing it? So it’s—no matter what it is.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I would think that your grandfather had something to do with this, by takingyou places where new things were happening. Dennis: Well, he—he did. He took me to Detroit. He became a Ford dealer in 1935,and 1939 or 1940 on our way to the New York World’s Fair we went toDetroit. He was a very—at one stage of the game he was the largest Forddealer, prior to the war, he was the largest Ford dealer on the Pacific Coast. Sohe was well received at the factory and [brief interruption]. Okay—anyway,where was I—what was the last thing I said?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, you were talking about innovation and then your grandfather, the large— Dennis: Oh yeah, and when we traveled—yeah—we went back with him to Dearbornand visited the Ford factory. They gave us an escort and a car and, God—wewent all over the River Rouge Plant, including the steel mill and everythingelse—you know, you go down into the steel mill and see these huge hotingots. It’s things you couldn’t do today—there’s just no way you can do themtoday. But he loved that sort of thing and he had a couple of good friends back therethat were—Carl Breer and Fred Zeder, who were two partners with WalterChrysler, and the three of them had started the Chrysler Motor Company. Chrysler was dead and gone, and I don’t think that my grandfather was ever aclose friend of Walter Chrysler, but he was close friends with the Zeders andthe Breers, and they had these absolutely magnificent houses out at GrossePointe with huge lawns that went down to the Detroit River and a dock and aboat sitting there. It was a pretty heady life and I know—I can still rememberthat after that visit there, my grandfather said, “Well, Reid I have some friendswho’ve made a lot more money than I have made in my life, but they have tolive in Detroit.” [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And that’s all right with me. Dennis: And that’s okay with me—and they lived quite well out here. But at any rate, Don Tresidder having given me my first job when I—I think itwas Don Tresidder’s recommendation that I go to the Thacher School down inthe Ojai Valley when they were looking for a prep school. Don took me downand delivered me there, as a matter of fact, because the Tresidders flew asmall airplane in the thirties, they had a Waco [Aircraft Corporation], a cabinclass Waco. My mother was scared to death of flying, but any time theTresidders asked me to fly with them, she’d let me go. And so I loved flyingand sitting in the back seat of that airplane. So I went to Thacher; I was there for four years. There were only seventy-fivekids in the school when I was there, so it was a small school. But I think thatgot me on my feet and focused me on studying in a way that I probablywouldn’t have if I’d gone to a larger public high school. There were no girlsthere, which meant there were fewer distractions at that time. We’d havedances occasionally, where they’d import the girls, but nevertheless, Thachertaught me how to study, how to meet deadlines—a paper is due when it’s due,and things like that. I did very well in the math and the physics and thechemistry courses. Those were my strong suits. French was my weak suit. I did all right in Latin, and it’s interesting that at the time I can rememberthinking, My God, this is a waste of time. Why are we studying Latin? Andyet today—there are still times when you think about sentence structure andthings like that, and it is such a structured language. In terms of businessthings—I know when I worked for American Express I had one fund managerworking for me who was a very good investor and a very good manager of thefund, but he’d write a report to be presented to the executive committee andit’d be three pages long, and I’d go through and I’d strike out unnecessarywords and redundancies and stuff, and I could boil it down to about less than apage and it’d still mean the same thing.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you learned how to write.  Dennis: So I learned something about how to write and how to express yourself in theEnglish language, although I may not be doing as great a job today assometimes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: No, you’re fine. Well, tell me about Stanford. You majored in engineering? Dennis: Well, I applied for Stanford—I graduated from Thacher in ’44 so I applied toStanford to be admitted in the fall of ’44, you know, because you didn’t knowwhen the war was going to end, but of course, I went in the navy for two yearsinstead. But nevertheless—and Don Tresidder said, “I want to write one ofyour letters of recommendation.” He was then president of Stanford and—[chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It probably helped! Dennis: I said, Gee, I’m not at all—I didn’t say this, but I think maybe my mother wasnot at all sure that was appropriate, and she said—and Tresidder’s attitudewas, “Well, I gave him his first job!” [laughter] And it was very, veryimportant in those summer jobs that you stay through Labor Day—that younot quit a week or two early and leave them in the lurch. And I stayed until thelast dying gasps, so to speak, before I had to go back to school. And I wasconscientious about what I was doing up there, so—anyway, he wrote a letterof recommendation and I was accepted at Stanford. Of course Stanford waswhen I came back from the navy, Stanford honored that acceptance, so it wasjust sort of a natural thing for me to do now.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And then was there a flood of applicants because of the G.I. Bill? Dennis: Oh sure. It started up—but it wasn’t an uncontrollable flood. But you know, Ithink that it’d be interesting to take a look at college enrollments after WorldWar II, because I think that from a philosophical point of view, when youthink about government policy and education policy, and you think aboutinvestments, I don’t think this nation has ever made a better investment thanthe one they made with the G.I. Bill. After World War II, we educated allsorts of kids at the college level, all sorts of kids from—particularly from theMidwest who never in their wildest dreams thought they were going to evergo to college. But a lot of them passed through California on their way to thePacific and they never went back to the Midwest, except to visit. [chuckling]But you mean, Gee, you don’t have to shovel snow out here? It’s pretty good!It’s not bad.  But I think that was a tremendous boost to the United States in terms of oureconomic development because of the way we educated kids. And we’re facedwith a major problem today in terms of how do we solve that problem. I hopewe do it with enough imagination and courage that we do something similar.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, Obama has made a lot out of doing something about improvingeducation so everybody has a chance. Dennis: Well, you know—and he stands, in my mind, he stands as the mostoutstanding example of the fact that we should educate our kids to themaximum of their ability rather than to the maximum of their financial ability.To the maximum of their intellectual ability rather than to the maximum oftheir financial ability. I think that’s the way we ought to educate kids. If theycan get into—I’ll have to say, UC Berkeley or Stanford or Princeton or Yaleor Harvard—if they can meet the entrance requirements and have theintellectual capacity to do well at those schools, we ought to get them in thereand we’ll get the best return on our investment.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I agree. Dennis: It’s—being very calloused—it will be a return on investment.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All right. So Stanford—and your grandfather had pointed you towardsengineering. Dennis: Absolutely, yeah—and my interest in electric trains pointed me towards—andthen my radio technician training pointed me towards electrical engineering. Now at Stanford I took a course in wave theory once, I can remember,because that’s fairly important in electrical work. I and I can remember I gotabsolutely lost as to which way the waves were going, so if you can’t figureout which way the waves are going, you probably don’t have the kind ofabilities to be a really creative engineer. So that’s what sort of led me in—Iknew I wasn’t going to be a creative engineer—so that’s what sort of led meto the business school after engineering. My whole plan was I was going tolearn something about the field of finance, and then I was going to go to workfor an electronics company down on the peninsula here and act as the liaisonbetween the financial world and the technical world.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And was that a new way of thinking? Were there people doing that kind ofthing?  Dennis: Not really, because after I got out of business school I went to work in SanFrancisco for the Fireman’s Fund Insurance Company. When I interviewedthe man that was in charge of the investment department up there, he said,“Reid, we think there’s a lot that’s going to happen in fields related toengineering, and we think it’d be easier to take somebody who knowssomething about engineering and teach him something about investments thanit would be to take a typical liberal arts major and teach him how tounderstand engineering.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. Dennis: And it was interesting at the time—this is 1952 that I got out of school, and Iwent to work for Fireman’s Fund in the fall of ’52. If you were a liberal artsmajor from a good business school, the starting salary was $325 a month. Ifyou were an engineering student with a business school degree and you wentto work for one of the companies here on the peninsula, or elsewhere, thestarting salary would be $425 a month. That’s a big spread. He said, “We’rewilling to pay you a starting engineer’s wage to come and work for us atFireman’s Fund.” So for a hundred bucks a month, that extra hundred bucks amonth they got me! I can still remember the interview—he said, “If we give you this job, do youthink you will still be here three years from now?” Boy that sounded like along time. That sounded like half of the rest of my life, and I wasn’t at all surethat it was going to take me three years to learn about investments and then goget a good job somewhere else. But I sort of bit my tongue and said, “Ohyeah, I’m sure, yes sir, I’ll be here for three years.” Well, I ended up stayingtwenty-one years and Fireman’s Fund became part of American Express. But the fellow I worked for named Fred [H.] Merrill, who was—Fred was oneof these wonderful guys who would leave piles of responsibility lying aroundon the floor of his office, and if you wanted to go in and pick up one of thosepiles of responsibility and go run with it, he couldn’t be more pleased. “Be myguest. Take it and do what you can.” And the thing that really propelled meinto the venture business happened—well, it really sort of came to a climaxabout a month or so before I went to work for Fireman’s Fund.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But step back a minute, though—what were you hired to do at Fireman’sFund? Dennis: I was hired to become a security analyst trainee. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. And so that’s why he wanted this, at least a three-year commitment. Hedidn’t want to train you and have you disappear. Dennis: Sure, but security analysis in those days was quite different than what it laterbecame. But nevertheless, he just wanted, whatever training I got, it wasprimarily field trips. At that time I would say more than almost anything elseit was—we made an awful lot of investment decisions based on our appraisalsof the management of these companies and whether we thought they weredoing a good job as well as, of course, the markets for their products. Youwanted to have good sales and so forth. But it wasn’t a really very formaltraining program. It was more or less on-the-job training—you know, youknow, you’re going to go make some mistakes and you’re going to do somethings right and we hope there’ll be more of the latter than the former.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was this what we would now call today the venture capital branch ofFireman’s Fund? Dennis: No, no.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What was this unit? Dennis: No—this was just strictly investing in industrial stocks. This was—do youhang on to your Westinghouse? Or do you invest in both GE andWestinghouse and Dupont, and going to security analyst meetings andlistening to management programs and stuff. But he said, “You know, ifyou—we’re not going to invest in these little dinky companies.” Let me back up for a minute—and get this point across again—because justbefore I joined Fireman’s Fund, I had seen when I was at Stanford inengineering, I’d seen an Ampex tape recorder in an engineering seminar. Itwas a very early, very crude tape recorder. And I said, “You know—I think—I don’t know anything about tape recording but I think that technology isgoing to be useful for a lot more things than just recording Bing Crosby’svoice.” And that’s what got Ampex started, was Bing Crosby wanted to playgolf on Sunday afternoon rather than having to go on the radio, and he had avery popular Sunday afternoon radio program. Well, none of the recording systems up to that time had enough fidelity toallow him to go play golf on Sunday afternoon. He had to be there in person,so the magnetic tape recording came along and Crosby Enterprises gaveAmpex, I think, the order for their first ten machines, just so Bing could playgolf. They never became investors in the company, but they did give them theorder that got them going. And I said, “I think it’s going to be used for more things than that.” I didn’t know what all they were going to be used for, butthere were some hints that it would be used for some other things. Well, as I had a chance—about a month before, and that happened while I wasin engineering, but about a month before I went to work for Fireman’s Fund, Iran into a friend of my brother’s in one of the offices on Montgomery Street,and he knew I had been interested in Ampex and he said, “Reid, we’re doing alittle financing for Ampex.” He and his family were heavily involved withAmpex as a private company. And he said, “We’re doing a little financing andmaybe you’d be—.” Well, actually, he thought the man I worked for at thetime might be interested in putting some money into it, and as a result of thatconversation, I ended up putting the amount that I could afford at the time—itturned out to be $13,000, and I said, “Oh, I recognize that number—$13,000.That was an opportunity missed once before and I’m not going to let it happenthis time.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How had you acquired $13,000? Dennis: It was left over from my college education. My grandparents had helped meget through college and had given me a little bit of a trust fund, and I had—there was $13,000 in there that I could sell some Southern California Edisonpreferred stock. I didn’t control the trust fund, my mother was trustee, but shetalked to her investment counselor and they knew some of the people thatwere involved with Ampex and they said, “Oh that’s a good company, now ifhe’s going to—.” At any rate, so I ended up—this financing had a minimum of $25,000 units,but you could split a unit. So I looked at it for my boss and he said, “Reid, Idon’t care whether I take half a unit or if you want fifteen or whatever, I’ll—.”He was very gracious and I said, “Well, I think in ninety days I can come upwith another $2,000, so I’d like to take 15 out of this $25,000 unit. Well, that$15,000, in a period of about three-and-a-half years turned into somethingbetween $800,000 and $900,000. And I just took the whole pile of everythingI had and pushed it out on the table.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How old were you at this point? Dennis: Oh, let’s see—in 1952 I had to be twenty-six.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You were doing all right. Dennis: But I had—twenty-six—by that time I guess I had three kids or four kids. Ican’t remember which! I got married in the second quarter of my sophomore year. And we had two kids before I graduated—well, that would be ’52, so—yeah, ’52 and two kids. But at any rate—but that really was my first, whatwould now qualify as a venture capital investment. [interruption to commenton room logistics]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But you told me off tape today that there was not that term. Dennis: No, no, no—I’m just saying that—no, it was just an investment in a privatelyheld company, but it was—no that term did not apply in those days, butnevertheless, in today’s lingo that would qualify as my first venture capitalinvestment.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. Dennis: And it sort of said, “God, this is better than working!” But I still didn’t want toleave Fireman’s Fund. I was having too much fun, you know. And my bosssaid you know, frankly, he knew I was interested in looking at these smallhigh-tech companies and he said, “If you go on a business trip and you wantto go visit the xyz company or the abc company, that’s all right. Be our guest.You can do that. If you visit some of these small companies while you’retraveling, you will learn things that will probably affect our investment inGeneral Electric or Westinghouse, or one of the bigger companies—RCA,”something like that. It was interesting—there was a lot of common wisdom that said RCA ought tocontrol the magnetic tape-recording business. They never did, you know,Ampex controlled that. And you know, just wait until RCA catches up tothem. Well, they never caught up to them. But my objective was still, forsome time I was thinking that I’d eventually go back to work on the peninsula,but Fireman’s Fund was very good to me. What we did was—and I went to work there in 1952—it was 1960 before Ifinally got—eight years later—that I finally got Fireman’s Fund to make itsfirst, what you would now call, a venture capital investment, and in a privatelyheld venture deal. In those days it was called special situations, and I thinkthat we had, at Fireman’s Fund we had six members of the board of directors[who] were on the investment committee. None of them had an investmentbackground. They were all heads of big corporations and the only one thatreally understood investments was A. Crawford Greene, who was a lawyer inSan Francisco who was very close to one of the big banks in New York and hewould opine that this particular bank thought well of something or didn’t thinkwell of something. And that carried a lot of weight.  I can remember one of the officers was—I think he was a senior vice presidentof the Bank of America, a big guy—I can’t remember his name right now{add name? }. He had a fist like a ham hock and he’dcome down on the table, “Well, at the bank we’re doing this,” or that orsomething else. Well, by talking to the analysts at the lower levels in the bank,we would know damn well that the bank wasn’t doing that at all! Butnevertheless, the investment committee was a gentleman’s club, and if theyhadn’t heard of—if you presented something to them and they had neverheard the name before—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You mean a company? Dennis: A company, a company name, and they had never heard the name of thiscompany before, it by definition became what was called “a special situation.”And special situations were things that nobody knew anything about exceptmaybe some of us at the lower level. And that is what eventually becameknown as venture capital.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Meaning special being kind of exceptional situations. Dennis: Exceptional, yeah—exception to the standard practice, because here was thisfancy investment committee and none of them knew anything about it otherthan what they got from the junior analysts who were sitting around the table.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And was there also the connotation that this was risky? Dennis: Oh yeah. There was—it was risky but it’s—the first such investment theFireman’s Fund made was in a company called Recognition Equipment, downin Dallas, Texas. Recognition Equipment was developing a new opticalcharacter reader, and they were developing something that was called a pagereader. My boss, Fred Merrill, said, “This new device has some realapplication in the insurance business. It could read claims forms.” And I got all steamed up—well, I heard about this company from somebodyin New York, a broker, who said, “Look, Reid, I would like to meet with youafter hours because I don’t want to take your time during the day. This doesn’treally apply to Fireman’s Fund, but I’d like to talk to you about how wefinance this company,” because we’d done a number of other financings in thefifties, in the late fifties. I’ll get back to that, but he told me what it was andgave me this big report. I brought it back here; it was Thanksgiving Dayweekend.  I took it down to the fellow who was in charge of our data-processing atFireman’s Fund, and he took it home and read it, digested this thing over theThanksgiving weekend, and came in Monday morning and he said, “Reid, ifthese guys have half of what they claim they have, this is better than slicedbread.” I recognized that sliced bread was pretty good. So with that, the two ofus went together and Fred Merrill told the investment committee, “We aregoing to give this company an order for the first machine that they willproduce. And that is going to have such a dramatic impact on the financialcondition of this company that we ought to take advantage of it by investing init at the same time.” And that’s what carried the day.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And did Fred Merrill have the pull where these concerned the boardmembers? Dennis: Oh yes, oh yes, sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So what he said went? Dennis: Absolutely, yeah.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because would they have resisted without— Dennis: No, no, no, no. They understood the argument and we were only talking aboutinvesting, I think, $650,000 was a modest amount, or $600,000, somethinglike that. But we were going to be giving them an order for this big machine,so we might as well put some more money out in the form of investment andwe got behind it. Well, that—we later—[technical interruption to switchtapes][End Audio File 1] Dennis: Recognition Equipment, in 1960, became the first special situation thatFireman’s Fund got involved in.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now are you painting the board of directors as not necessarily averse toinvestment in innovative ideas, but more just untutored? Not knowing enoughto decide one way or the other?  Dennis: Yeah, I think this board of directors operated in a certain circle, and it wasvery much of a club and they knew other members of the club. Then heresuddenly we were recommending companies that they didn’t know anythingabout. So they were not opposed to the idea—they were perfectly willing totake a chance and they did. It was interesting a couple of years later;Recognition Equipment went public and the stock went up to the point wherewe had doubled our money.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So they couldn’t deny that! Dennis: Well, no, but they suggested at a meeting—I used to go to these meetings.There was a suggestion at one meeting that, “Well, Mr. Dennis, you’vedoubled your money in this investment, don’t you think you should sell half ofit and get our money back?” And I said, “Well, sir, I think it still has more togo.” Well, it tripled and—“Shouldn’t you sell a third of it and get our moneyback?” “Well, it still has more to go.” We played this game for a couple of years until the point—and we weresupposed to get prior approval from the committee before we sold anything,but one day I came into the office and the price of Recognition stock had goneup to the point where we’d made ten times our money. And I said, “I’m goingto sell 10 percent of it and get our money back,” [chuckling] which I did! Andthen I just—without authorization, I sold the 10 percent, got the money back,and then at the next meeting of the committee I reported that I had movedahead and had gotten our money back out of Recognition Equipment. Well, that stock went on to become the largest tangible asset the Fireman’sFund had. At the height of the market we owned over $40 million worth of thestock, with a cost basis of a little over a million dollars. By the time we werethrough, we took out about $15 million in profits, which was pretty good.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Pretty impressive. Were you making decisions all along? You were watchingwhat was happening to the stock—was it mainly on the basis of share price?Or were you looking at the company in greater depth than that? Dennis: Well, it was interesting, because I actually went on the board. The investmentbecame so important to Fireman’s Fund that I actually went on the board ofdirectors of Recognition Equipment, so I was very well informed as to whatwas going on.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And when that happens—how did that work? Did Fireman’s Fund say,“We’ve got x dollars of investment in you—you’d better take this young guyand put him on your board?” Was that the way it went?  Dennis: Oh no. No, no, no. I was close enough to the company that they wanted me togo on the board.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Okay, all right. So it was not pressure from them. Dennis: No, no pressure at all, no. No—and I wasn’t that young anymore. Remember,this is 1960. I was in my thirties. [laughter] Yeah, I was an old man!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Old man. Dennis: An old man in the latter half of my thirties. So it’s—something like that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So that was your first board membership, presumably. Dennis: Yes, it was.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you know what to do as a director? Dennis: Oh I think so, yeah, I think so. It was a great learning experience and I was onthat board for nineteen years. I went on the board early on before the thingbecame a successful investment. They wanted my input.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So they presumably were relying on you for investment—or were they morefor management of the company? Dennis: No, it’s a wavy line between those two. It’s a fairly porous border. I think thatit’s one of the reasons why I think it’s important for young people who wantto go into the venture business to not be in a hurry. I think the venturebusiness is a better business to enter after you’ve been doing something elsefor ten years, working at what I call an honest job somewhere else andlearning something about management of an enterprise, and learning aspecialty, whether it be marketing or finance or something else—ormanufacturing. But at any rate that’s—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, did you indeed find that your years of membership on that board didhave great application for what you were going to do later? 20 Dennis: Oh gosh, yes. [chuckling] It certainly did, because at one stage of the game,we had to look for a new chief executive officer for Recognition Equipmentand we formed a three-man executive committee. We didn’t have a candidateto become the new CEO, but we knew we had to get rid of the old CEO, so inthe interim period, the founding CEO of Recognition Equipment was one ofthese guys who would, two months before the end of the fiscal year, thecompany would be in terrible trouble and then through heroic efforts on hispart in the last two months of the year, he’d go pull out the whole fiscal yearand everybody would be giving him a pat on the back. Well, there’s no reasonin the world why it had to get into all that trouble anyway, in the first place. Recognition Equipment was a company that was more interested in trying tosolve virtually impossible engineering problems than it was in making money.So we had to get rid of this guy and go on an executive search for a new CEO,and by this time I was—they had made me chairman of the board at REI, andTrammell Crow, the real estate developer, lived, lives—still lives in Dallas,but he [telephone ringing] was on the board. [Trammell Crow died January14, 2009.] So it was a great learning experience; it was a fabulous learning experience.Serving for nineteen years, serving on a board of directors, you’d better learnsomething. But I ended up as I say, chairman of the board, and then when wedecided we had to make a change in the CEO, we decided to form anexecutive committee as an interim committee to run the company and keep theCEO from going wild while we were looking for a new CEO. At any rate—so we formed a three-man executive committee to run thecompany. It was—the CEO, Trammell Crow, who was in the real estatebusiness, and myself. And I was made chairman of the executive committee.So I was chairman of the board and chairman of the executive committee. Andafter the meeting broke up and we walked out into the hall, Trammell put hisarm around me and said, “Reid, I don’t have time to fuss with this. You’ve gottwo votes on this committee.” [chuckling] So I was back and forth to Dallastwice a month for quite a long period of time until we found a new CEO whowas good for a while and really pulled the company out and got it going, got itgoing up and up and up, but it went right over the top and back down again, soit was—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What do you mean by that? Because of his mismanagement? Dennis: He was more interested in growing sales than he was in building a profitablecompany.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see, I see. And were you trying to advise him otherwise?  Dennis: Well, this was a pretty strong character. It was pretty hard to do, but at anyrate—that’s sort of a diversion, but I do think it taught me a lot about—I don’twant to get into the personalities on that, but I think it taught me a lot about—I learned a lot about being a board member in that particular experience. Ithink the other thing that you should know is that having gotten Fireman’sFund into the venture business, and having gotten them into the venturebusiness on a successful basis, REI was—you know, this is probably one ofthe cardinal rules that anybody thinking about venture investing or specialsituation investing should always follow and that is to always make your firstsuch investment a very successful one. If you can do that, then—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And are you going to tell us how to do that? [laughter] Dennis: Well, I don’t know how to do it—it was—you’ve got to be lucky, butobviously my first investment in Ampex was a very successful one. TheFireman’s Fund’s first investment in Recognition Equipment was a verysuccessful one.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did anything surprise you? Dennis: Not really. No, not really.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You expected it? Dennis: Look—there was a lot of opportunity at the time and there were not a lot ofpeople in this business. There was not a lot of competition in this business.There was not a lot of competition in terms of people funding small littleprivately held companies. And my arrangement with Fred Merrill was prettyinteresting because he knew that I liked to invest in these little dinky things,but he said, “Reid,”—at that time I had gotten to the point where I couldinvest maybe $25,000, maybe even $50,000 at a crack at that time because ofmy success with Ampex, and he said, “we’re not going to look at investmentsthat small. So anything that’s $50,000 or less, you can feel free to invest in.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Meaning you personally, Reid Dennis. Dennis: Meaning me, Reid Dennis, personally. “And anything that’s $250,000 or moreas an opportunity, we, Fireman’s Fund, want to have a look at it.” So we gotsort of a $200,000 no man’s land in between here, which is the way weavoided the conflict of interest. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That was smart. Dennis: Yeah, and it worked very, very well. And I made, personally, I made a lotmore money than Fred Merrill did in my personal investments, and yet he hadan investment background. And some senior officers would be very jealous ofthat sort of thing and resentful of this—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Young punk. Dennis: Young punk out here in the investment department who’s doing so well, andyet he took a great deal of pleasure in it and said, “You know, I’d rather havea successful investor running my investment department—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] I would think! Dennis: —than an unsuccessful investor. And that’s what I heard from visitors whohad come to visit him and then he’d send them in to see me.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So I imagine your reputation as an astute investor was spreading, or was itmaybe still {unclear}. Dennis: No, it was pretty good. It was pretty good because we have to, somewherealong the line here we have to back up and talk about what happened in thefifties and sixties on the personal side, because—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All right. Well, let’s do that now. Dennis: Because at that time, from roughly 1955 to 1965, there was a group of us inSan Francisco, and we called ourselves The Group, as a matter of fact, for thelack of a better name. It consisted of Bill Bowes, who was then at Blyth &Company, and John Bryan was at Blyth & Company. Bill Bowes later wenton to form U.S. Venture Partners. John Bryan became a partner with BillEdwards in a company called Bryan and Edwards, but Bryan and Edwardswas primarily investing their own money and their own financial resources.Bill Bowes went out to U.S. Venture Partners and raised a lot of money fromthe outside.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now how did that group come together?  Dennis: Well, we just knew each other. We were all about the same age; we allworked in the financial district. I was the only one that had a EE background,and so I could understand what some of these—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: They had business and investment backgrounds? Dennis: Yeah, they had investment backgrounds; they were working for investmentcompanies, but we were about the same age.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see, but they didn’t have the science. Dennis: But they didn’t have the technical training. When I went to work forFireman’s Fund in ’52, I was really the only young person, the only youngperson in the financial community up there, just out of school, who did havean engineering background and an engineering degree. So I’d get calls frombrokers and other people along Montgomery Street there and [they’d] say,“Reid, we’ve had a visit from some guy. He’s got a black box and I can’t tellyou what this black box does, but he’s looking for financing. Would you mindtalking to him?” So I’d say, “No. I don’t mind talking to him.” So we ended up with a group of us—there were five in The Group: Dan[Daniel J.] McGanney at Lionel D. Edie was also part of it—that was aninvestment counsel firm. And we had some other people that participatedalongside of us. But we would get four or five members of this group together,and the group consisted of five members, and we’d get four of us or five of ustogether and we’d invite the entrepreneur to come have lunch at Jack’s orSam’s.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now did you, the group, invite the entrepreneurs? Dennis: Oh sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You were known and people were {unclear}. Dennis: Well, the broker would call us and say, “Would you talk to so and so.” Andthen one of us would talk to him and get a preliminary idea and then we’d say,“Well, we’ll call the group together. Can you join us for lunch on this or thator some other day?”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, do you want to just finish with The Group? And then we’ll take a break?  Dennis: Yeah, we’ll get interrupted here for a minute.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So there was a little bit of vetting, it sounds like—the person who was firstcontacted would look over this proposition, right? Dennis: Absolutely, yeah. [brief interruption] Okay. Anyhow—where was I—oh, wewould call The Group together, get the entrepreneur to come in and havelunch with us. Eventually one of our members got to become a member of theUniversity Club and sometimes we’d go up there and have a fancy lunch. Butwe liked Sam’s, which was—I think on Bush Street or Pine—Pine [it’s onBush Street], I think, because they had little booths, plywood booths and theplywood was about an eighth of an inch thick so you could hear everythinggoing on in the next booth, but nevertheless, we felt as though we had a littleprivacy. We’d call the entrepreneur in and we’d have lunch with him. He would tell ushis story and after lunch was over—and it was always a he—he didn’t getmuch to eat, but nevertheless, he’d get the story out. We’d excuse him andsay, “Go stand outside on the sidewalk for ten minutes and let us talk aboutthis and we’ll come out and tell you what our decision is.” And we’d talkaround the table—“Do you like it? Who has questions?” And so forth and soon. “Who’s going to be on his board?” We’d assign one of The Group to bethe leader and then we would go out and—both John Bryan and Bill Edwardshad some inherited wealth and they could invest, oh, $30,000 or $40,000 ifthey wanted to, but they could invest $25,000 or $30,000 quite easily. I wasabout a $10,000 or $15,000 investor at the time. But if we liked the deal, we’dgo out and we’d tell the ent[repreneur]. At that time—in the late fifties into the middle sixties—you could start acompany down here on the peninsula for anywhere from $250,000 to$350,000 dollars. And that’s what they needed as startup capital.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And that’s because everything’s lower—rent, salary, {unclear}. Dennis: Sure, sure, everything, yeah. Everything was lower—but that’s all you neededto get up to the point where you could get going and prove things would work.So we’d go out and we’d tell the entrepreneur, “Well, we like your deal.We’ve got $80,000 raised around the table from the five of us. Give us tendays and we’ll raise the rest of the money and we’re going to do your deal.”So all five of us would go back to our offices that afternoon and we’d callvarious hangers-on and camp-followers that worked in these brokerage firms. I can remember—we started what became the medical-electronics division ofSmith, Kline & French this way. [chuckling] Two entrepreneurs who really worked their hearts out, and we grew that thing on the Stanford campus to thepoint where Smith, Kline—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It was at Stanford! Dennis: That one was just in a rental building—not on the campus. It was over in theindustrial park, yeah, just in a rental building. Just in a warehouse. Well,actually when I first saw Corbin-Farnsworth they were in a little dinky shackjust off of Page Mill Road, but once the financing is done then they rented thewarehouse.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So is that fairly typical? That these entrepreneurs were pretty local? Dennis: Oh yeah, yeah.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And Silicon Valley types? Dennis: Most of it—Silicon Valley. Well, we did a couple of deals in San Diego orSouthern California. But the main thing is that it had to be relatively close by.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why was that? Because you wanted to be able to {unclear} them. Dennis: We wanted to be able to contact them easily, and we all had full-time jobsworking for somebody else.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see; you couldn’t be hopping on a plane. Dennis: You couldn’t be hopping on a plane to go see Joe Blow. We had full-time jobsdoing something else and so it had to be nights and weekends and things likethat that we got together with these guys.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How did these entrepreneurs react? Because you must have been just aboutthe only game in town. Dennis: They reacted very well.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: No but I mean from that—I didn’t phrase that question very well. I’m justimagining that at that time it was a fairly new phenomenon.  Dennis: It was a new phenomenon.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: For anybody to get hold of a group, have lunch, and say, “Okay, we can comeup with $800,000 and start your company! Dennis: Well, $800,000 we couldn’t do.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All right—then $80,000. Dennis: $250,000 to $300,000 of which we would put up $80,000 and eventually thatbecame $100,000 or a little more. But I can remember when we wereapproached by a fellow named Dave Bossen who’d come out from Ohio. Hehad worked for a company that made a paper thickness measuring machine.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh—Bill Draper talked about that. Dennis: Yeah, and the—Measurex.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right, Measurex. Dennis: Yes, Measurex. And Dave Bossen needed $1,200,000 to start his company.“Holy smokes, Dave! We’ve never seen money like that.” Well, he went backto New York and he got Pete Bancroft and his group at—what’s the name?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Bessemer. Dennis: At Bessemer Securities—and Bessemer Securities agreed to put up, I thinkeither $400,000 or $450,000, and there were a couple of other investors thatcame in, so he raised $600,000. Then he came back to see us and we said, “Ohwell, $600,000—we can do that!” But 1.2 million, there was no way we coulddo that, so we trailed along on Pete Bancroft’s coattails on that one. And hewas—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Had you known Pete Bancroft before this? Dennis: Well, I knew Bessemer Securities and that’s when I really got to know PeteBancroft fairly well. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You mentioned that part of this discussion around the table after theentrepreneur was standing on the curb was who would go on the board. Weredecisions like that made just by who happened to have the free time? Or werethere matching of backgrounds? Dennis: I can remember one day when I turned to Bill Edwards and said, “Bill—it’syour turn to go on the board.” Bill said, “I don’t know anything about beingon a board.” I said, “Well, join the club. Neither did any of the rest of us whenwe first started doing this, so you’re going to learn. But you’ve got to carryyour fair share.” So it was an assignment. We helped one another, but no—it was a great learning experience for all ofus. During that probably ten- or twelve-year period, from the middle-fifties tomiddle-sixties, we invested I think in maybe twenty-five little companiesdown the peninsula here. Of those twenty-five, I’d say eighteen of them werewildly successful; it was a very high percentage. And a couple of them we gotour money back. I think we only had big losses on maybe three.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Isn’t that an incredible record? Dennis: Yeah, yeah. It was—it was—the success ratio was very, very high. And weweren’t—later on, this business became one where you sort of expect the—[brief interruption]. Anyhow, later on people would say, “Well, all you need isone or two really good hits out of ten investments.” I don’t think so. I thinkthat the thing that really made the venture capital business highly successfulwas having a hit ratio of about 65 to 70 percent were successful investmentsand your real duds were only about 15 percent.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You mean from the standpoint of confidence? Dennis: In terms of financial return, just profitability.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, but I’m also—yes, I understand that. Dennis: It relates to confidence, yeah.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yeah, because if you have a percentage like that, people are going to say,“Well, these guys obviously know what they’re doing. Let’s go to them.” Dennis: Sure, yeah, absolutely. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But you’re implying that that isn’t true particularly? Dennis: I don’t think so.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You just need one or two really big ones. Dennis: Well, no, no. I don’t think it’s a question of need. I think it’s a question ofattitude towards the business. That’s what a lot of venture capitalists thinkthey need to do. I don’t think that is the way to really be successful in theventure capital business.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You need something else. Dennis: I think you need a bigger percentage of winners. You’re better off not makingthe investment than having a mediocre one.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see, yeah. Well maybe we can talk about this after the break. [interruption inrecording] I had just one more question, I think, about that subject and then Iwanted to go back to Fireman’s Fund and talk about the SBIC. Dennis: Okay. SBIC—the legislation about that?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yeah, and in fact, I thought that Fireman’s Fund actually had an SBIC. Dennis: No, we never did.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh you didn’t. That was misinformation then. Well, is it worth sayingsomething about—because I looked upon that as kind of an interim phase ofwhat became venture capital. Dennis: Well, it—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: We’re not on—anyway. Oh we are. Dennis: We’re on! Then we have to apologize for this recent diversion. [laughter]Well, we can talk about the SBIC movement and why we never had an SBIC. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, that’s what— Dennis: Because the SBIC legislation came along in order to get some governmentmoney into the hands of investors who would invest it in small companies.Small Business Investment Company is what an SBIC stands for—SmallBusiness Investment Company. It was, in effect, a government loan to thosecompanies, but along with it came a number of restrictions. And along with italso came a different kind of a tax consequence. It was, I think, harder togenerate capital gains through an SBIC. I can’t remember because we neverwent into the SBIC field because we had, within Fireman’s Fund andAmerican Express, we had plenty of capital ourselves, so we didn’t need thegovernment help on capital and we didn’t really want the government red tapethat went along with the regulations.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yeah, which apparently was considerable. Dennis: It was considerable. But for people who did not have sufficient capital, andwanted to put up some capital and then leverage it with government money ontop of that, the SBIC form worked out very well. However, there were twovery separate branches of what became the venture business.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. Dennis: And I have no exposure, really at all, to SBICs.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you know when the SBIC became the less-favored way, when it began todie out, why that might have been? Dennis: I think it was to the end of the sixties, but I think that it was again because ofthe regulation and the fact that—more than anything else.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And probably also {unclear} that there was a better way of doing it. Dennis: Well, that’s true—but I think—at least there certainly was a different way ofdoing it that was less burdensome. But I think that you really need to talk tosomebody who had had one.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Had had one. 30 Dennis: Or more familiar with it and why did they get out of it and so forth. Forinstance, one of the things that’s interesting—and we’ll have to get into thislater—when we started our independent venture funds after—it was 1973-74—we avoided pension funds. In the huge bull market of venture capital andfundraising, pension funds have become a major source of capital, and it’s oneof the things that has flooded the industry with so much capital that it doesn’tknow what to do with it. But we avoided pension funds because of the socalled Prudent Man Rule that the pension funds were bound by. If you hadmore than 25 percent of your capital came from pension funds, then the wholefund was subject to the—I think it was 25 percent; I believe that’s right—thewhole fund became subject to those Prudent Man regulations. Well, the Prudent Man Rule on one side and venture capital on the other arereally two diametrically opposed propositions to invest in a company thatdoesn’t exist in the present time and bet on managers who you can’t see themactually doing their management job in that environment. But you expect thatthey can do it or else you wouldn’t invest in them. But nevertheless, it’shard—is it prudent to—I suppose you could say, “Look, the returns in venturecapital have been so good that it’s imprudent not to at least have a part of yourfund in that area.” [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And the whole—putting it very simplistically—was the burden of the PrudentMan Rules to reduce the risk of investment? Dennis: Oh it was a way of—for instance—it was a way of sheltering a financecommittee or a board of directors from liability. You didn’t ever wantanybody to come back and say, you know, take you to court because youmade some stupid decision, some stupid investment decision. I think that inour current situation, you can say that Bernie [Bernard L.] Madoff did notreally follow the Prudent Man Rule. He was at the opposite end of thatspectrum. Now—was it prudent for his investors to invest in it? Was itprudent for investment counselors to recommend that their clients invest withMadoff? Probably not, because as some people have said, the constant returnof 8 percent should have been a red flag that nobody can—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Keep doing that. Dennis: Keep doing that, year after year after year after year. But we’ll have to let thecourts decide that. But that did affect it, and in effect, you see, when we started our first venturecapital fund in ’73 and ’74, we ended up with—with seven investors, six ofthem were insurance companies. Six of them were insurance companies just like Fireman’s Fund was, you know, and because I had worked for aninsurance company and knew what their filing requirements were and whatthey had to do in January with respect to filing their investments—in ourmeetings I could talk like I was one of them, and they thought I was a memberof the family. I think that helped us a great deal in our fundraising, because Iunderstood their problems. And so we ended up with six insurance companiesplus the Ford Foundation. Those were our first seven investors in 1974. And at that time—it’s hard to believe it now—but in that time, 1974, the fundwe raised, which was $19 million, was 45% of all of the private venturemillion, of which we raised $19 [million] and we were the only fund thatraised $10 million or more.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, who else was there? Dennis: Kleiner Perkins, I think, started in ’72 and they raised $7 million. And therewere some other funds around too. Mayfield was around, Tommy Davis andMayfield. Tommy Davis used to work at Kern County Land Company, andTommy and I used to get—when I was with Fireman’s Fund, we’d gettogether and we’d talk about maybe we’d ought to set up an independentcompany to do these kinds of investments. We couldn’t figure out whether wewere going to call it Davis, Dennis or Dennis, Davis, so we never did gettogether.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] Was that really the only reason? Dennis: Oh—no, I think we just were both a little timid too. But then he ran intoArthur Rock and Davis and Rock—he, Tommy, he clearly got first billing theway the alphabet works, so that was that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now that Prudent Man law—or is it a law? What is it? Dennis: Well, it’s a rule that—it’s called the Prudent Man Rule, but it in effect it getsinterpreted by the courts and therefore—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yeah, and that was legislated—and wasn’t that one of the changes that camein in the late seventies? Dennis: Well, I don’t know, because we were never subject to it. So you’ve really gotto— <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What I was trying to— Dennis: I was just subject to a finance committee that decided whether we weremaking money or not.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, you had said over lunch, and I know this is jumping ahead a bit, but that1980 was probably the best year for venture capital, ever. Dennis: Sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And I know there was some legislation in the late-seventies and in 1980 thatdefinitely gave a stimulus to venture capital. Dennis: Certainly, and the two things that did it, and I was very, very much involvedalong with David Morgenthaler of Morgenthaler Associates from Cleveland.The two of us were both officers of the National Venture Capital Association[NVCA]. And we spent a lot of time in Washington, DC talking tocongresspeople. But 1978 was the—we were back there in late-’77 and I know that we talkedto, in the fall of ’77, we talked to the chairman of the Ways and MeansCommittee [Wilbur Mills?]. Just David and myself were in his office talkingto him and he said, “Gentlemen, I understand your arguments and yourproposition, and I agree with you and I think that that is something that needsto be taken care of.” But he says, “Quite frankly, I don’t think that capitalgains will even come up as a subject of discussion in this session of thelegislature.” Now this is in the fall of ’77, and in May of ’78 [telephoneringing] we had a law. [interruption for telephone call and short pause inrecording].<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Okay. You were starting—or are you not finished? Dennis: Well, what I was going to do—yeah, I’m not quite finished. I was talkingabout ’77 and ’78 and—[leafing through some documents?] where the hellis ’78? Well, I don’t seem to—I don’t have the right one here, but—at anyrate, I’ll find it. I’ve got it somewhere and I’ll get it organized by next time.But this was back in the days before we had Palm Pilots.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] It looks that way!  Dennis: This was the predecessor to the Palm Pilot.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is it? I’m still using a system like that! [chuckling] Dennis: Well, I’m looking here to see—I know I had it in here. Just a minute—you’renot rolling now, are you? I hope not.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What are you looking for? Dennis: I was looking for the date of our meeting with the chairman of Ways andMeans—and in terms of the really, the big boom in—the big boom in venturecapital—it got—you have to give Jimmy Carter the credit for this becauseearly in ’77—first off, Nixon was the one who really jacked up the capitalgains rate at one stage of the game, to the point where it practically killed theventure business. That was Nixon’s problem. And then Jimmy Carter camealong and said, early in ’77 he said we should get rid of all of the distinction,all of the differences between ordinary income and capital gains. He said wejust should wipe it out completely. Well, that so incensed the venture capital industry on the one hand and theAmerican Electronics Association on the other, which was very active here onthe peninsula—and it got them galvanized into action in a way that nobodyelse had ever been galvanized before, to get together and do something aboutthis thing. If it hadn’t been for Carter’s statement that we should get rid of allof the distinction between ordinary income and capital gains, I think we wouldhave drifted along, and they would have nickeled and dimed us to death bymaking small changes all along the line until the industry was wiped out. But as a result of Carter’s statement, the American Electronics Association—and this is an important part of the venture capital story on the peninsula; itgalvanized them into action. They did a survey of their members—they hadsome 600 and some odd members, and I think they got 400 responses to thissurvey. But they sent out a survey that required the financial officers of eachof their member companies to go back into their archives and come up withthe tax returns from the previous five years, and who do they pay the taxes toand so forth and so on. That was all put together in the form of a testimony. Iwish I had a copy of this testimony—I’ll try and get a—we should try and geta hold of a copy of it—but testimony that Ed [Edwin Van Wyck] Zschaumade before Ways and Means in March of 1978. In that testimony—we had been talking to enough congresspeople, and the[American] Electronics Association and the [National] Venture CapitalAssociation worked very closely together, but we’d been talking to enoughpeople in Congress and they said, “We, the Congress, we can create a job at government expense at a cost of about $25,000 a year.” That’s how much itcost us at that time to put somebody to work. And that would be a job likesweeping the sand off Ocean Beach, or something. As soon as the $25,000 ayear funding stopped, the sand would roll back in and the job would be overand done with and the guy would be out of work. We proved—Zschau and the Electronics Association, I should say, provedthat if you encouraged the venture capital community to invest $13,000 in oneof the electronics companies in their association, that you created—not onlydid you create a permanent job, but within five years, the various taxingauthorities, the city, county, state, and federal taxing authorities, would begetting a 30 percent return on our investment. We sat in front of thesecongressmen and said, “Gentlemen—we would love to get a 30 percent returnon our investment. But if I can get a 30 percent return on your investment—that’s even better! That’s even better!” And it was that argument and thatsurvey put together by the Electronics Association with the support of theVenture Association that really turned the tide. It was an absolutely fascinating process because we got to some congressmenwho really believed us. And Ed Zschau’s testimony before Ways andMeans—I was there; I testified on the same day, different testimony—I can’tfind a copy of that either, but nevertheless, it was that that caused this thing tohappen. So I can remember when David Morgenthaler and I visited an undersecretaryof the treasury one day in his office, and he totally stonewalled us on thisthing because he worked for the Carter administration. He didn’t have anysympathy for us at all. But, as I walked out of his office I noticed there was aNew Yorker cartoon on the back of his door, so I went over and I looked at itand a little cutout of a typical New Yorker cocktail party with two men talkingto one another and one of them says, “Venture capital—do you rememberventure capital?” This industry was essentially dead and gone as far as thesepeople were concerned. And yet—that was in the spring of ’78. We had this testimony in March, andin May we had a bill passed that reduced the capital gains rate from 48 percentdown to 28 percent. And then in 1980 there was another bill passed that tookit from 28 down to 20. Now the first bill in ’78 was sponsored by Bill [William A.] Steiger fromWisconsin, a congressman who died a few years after he did this, but it wascalled the Steiger Amendment. And he, in effect, spearheaded it through theHouse. He needed somebody in the Senate to carry the torch, and he got ahold of Hansen—Senator Clifford [P.] Hansen. Clifford Hansen was a senatorfrom Wyoming. He had already announced that he was going to retire and hewas not going to run for reelection, so he was a lame duck. But CliffordHansen was one of these people who was extremely well-liked in the Senate, and he was somebody who a number of people over the years had asked himfor this or that or some favor, or help me to support this bill or that bill. Hewas very, very helpful to a huge number of people and he had never asked foranything in return. So Steiger got him convinced that this was the right thingto do. Alan Cranston, who was our senator from California at the time and who wasthe Democratic whip in the Senate—he supported us in spite of the fact thatCarter was on the other side of the table. I can remember meeting withCranston and I said—I’d known Alan Cranston from some previous activitiesand I said, “Alan—the electronics industry in California is the second largestemployer of people other than agriculture—and these are your constituents.”So Cranston, as the whip, signed up and was supporting us. Well, Hansen took the bill, which became known as the Steiger-Hansen Bill,and he hand-carried that around the Senate. And before he was through, hehad sixty co-sponsors and there’s just no way the Carter Administration couldfight it. So that’s what got the first reduction; the second reduction came in1980. That’s why I say 1980 was the best year to start a company, becausemanagers just came pouring out of big companies to start their own—therewere more startups started in 1980 than I think almost any year in the historyof the business until recently.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And there was also increasing worry at the national level about America’scompetitiveness. We were worried about the Japanese and—there was afeeling that we were slipping, whereas since the war we had prided ourselveson— Dennis: On being ahead.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yeah. Dennis: Being the leader. No, there’s no question about that. There’s no questionabout it, and I think that concern has grown in recent years, continued togrow, but nevertheless, that’s what in effect what got us off the—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All right. Well, we kind of skipped into Institutional Venture Associates,which then becomes Institutional Venture Partners. Dennis: Venture Partners in 1980. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: {unclear} which means, does it not, that you had come to a decision to leaveFireman’s [Fund]/American Express? Dennis: American Express. Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why was that? Dennis: Well, in 19—what year did we start this thing—’74.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: ’74. Dennis: So in 1973, actually—no, in 1972—it was in, I think, May of 1972. At thattime I was—my official title was I was president of the American Expressgroup of mutual funds headquartered in San Francisco. I was writing moreletters to shareholders than the chairman of American Express was. We had avery successful group of mutual funds and I was president of it, but I realizedthat the handwriting was on the wall, and if I kept my nose clean and got onemore promotion, I got to move to New York. And they didn’t tell me whatfirst prize was, but I didn’t consider that to be first prize. And so I went to my boss and said—Fred Merrill was then chairman of all ofthe mutual funds, but he was a very inactive chairman, and I went to him and Isaid, “Fred, what I think we ought to do is you ought to retire as chairman. Letme become chairman, you bring in a new president and CEO, whoever youwant to to run the mutual funds, and I’ll get out of the fancy office and movedown in behind accounting somewhere in a smaller office. I will chair themeetings and I’ll do whatever I can to help your new president through thetransition, and I’ll run the board meetings and so forth and so on. And whenyou tell me you no longer need me, I’d like to get out of here. I really want togo into the venture business full-time.” I said, “I had 125 people working forme; I’m a lousy administrator; I’d much rather make investment decisions andI don’t want to move to New York. I really don’t want to be part of that bigsocial hierarchy at a major American corporation.” So that’s in effect what we did, and I stayed on for fifteen months after I’dtold him that I wanted to leave, and continued to operate out of that smalleroffice and bide my time until we were pretty well established with a new CEOon board, and it didn’t look as though—there was no management upheaval,which was—we had so many public shareholders in all the mutual funds Ididn’t want it to look like a big management turnover. So it was a veryfriendly departure.  I was in New York a few months before I was scheduled to leave, and thepresident of American Express then was a fellow named Bill [William H.]Morton, and he—I was walking down the hall one afternoon a little after 5:00and his door was open and he saw me and he yelled at me and said, “Reid!Come in here for a minute.” So I went in and he said, “Are you sure this iswhat you want to do?” And I said, “Bill, I’ve never been so sure of anythingin all my life.” And he said, “Well, we don’t want you to go, but if you’redetermined to go, you should take some of our money with you.” And so wesat down that afternoon and on the back of an envelope sketched out aboutfour or five conditions under which they would put up the first $5 million of afund that would be $15 [million] to $20 million in size. And that’s what—because American Express was putting in $5 million, it’s what allowed us,really, to call it Institutional Venture Partners.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh I see. I was wondering about that. Dennis: And then we went out and all we talked to were other insurance companiesand other institutions and foundations—but not pension funds. So that’s howwe ended up—knowing—we knew who the other insurance companies werethat were possibilities, and that’s how we did all of that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How much did your reputation precede you? The fact that you had animpressive record in terms of your past investments? Dennis: Well, I think they—[pause for tape change][End Audio File 2]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All right. What I asked was how much, if at all, did your reputation as aninvestor precede you, now that you were throwing your net wider trying to getother institutions involved. Dennis: Oh there’s no question about the fact that that helped a great deal. And it alsohelped a great deal that somebody like Jim [James S.] Kemper, Jr., who wasone of the first people we went to see, could call Fred Merrill and he knewFred Merrill and talked to him, and Fred would give us a great boost. And fora while, the vice president of the Kemper Insurance Company, who was incharge of the investment department, used to refer to this as Kemper’s Follyuntil our first fund began to turn out pretty damn well. And God, we ended upwith somewhere around a 38 or 40 percent return per year to all of the investors in our first fund, and then it became his brilliant investment ratherthan Kemper’s Folly. But he took ownership of it. I can remember going into Mutual of New York in New York City with mypartners, and the fellow in charge of that particular—a very senior fellow whowas very close to retirement, and it was amazing to me that Mutual of NewYork, this guy would make this kind of an investment decision, a ten-yearinvestment decision a matter of months before he retired from Mutual of NewYork. But he looked at me and said, “Oh Reid, we know who you are. I wantto talk to your partners here and find out who they are.” [chuckling] So there’s no question about the fact that—the fact that I’d been in theto ’73—twenty-one years made it an awful lot easier to get in the door. Theyall thought they knew exactly who I was and I, at various investmentmeetings, security analyst annual meetings and things like that, you wouldnaturally come to learn who the investment officers are for New EnglandMutual or the Penn Mutual, or one of these other companies. So there was sortof a camaraderie there that helped us get over some of those early hurdles. Noquestion about the fact.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was this a first-time investment of this nature for most of these institutions? Dennis: Absolutely, yeah. It certainly was for Kemper and it was for Mutual of NewYork. I think that Penn Mutual may have made one other. It was new for NewEngland Mutual.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you find that there was any difference between the East and West Coast interms of willingness to participate or familiarity with what you were trying todo? {unintelligible} Dennis: Well, you did not have a lot of other major institutions on the East Coast.Pacific Mutual Life out here—they didn’t get the message. I remember wetalked to them, but they didn’t go—. Fireman’s Fund/American Express didnot want us to approach Transamerica because they considered Transamericaa competitor in the insurance business, so they said, “Look, you’ve got to putthe fund together, but if you can do it without Transamerica, so much thebetter.” So we sort of avoided—there are more insurance companies that werecandidates on the eastern seaboard, and that’s why we originally went with—.New England Mutual actually introduced us to New York Mutual. We had a$2 million minimum, and New England Mutual didn’t think they could get upto $2 million, because we made it clear from the very beginning that wewanted very few limited partners and we wouldn’t take more than $20million. So we had this $2 million minimum.  Well, Kemper came in for $3 million; that clearly was above the minimum;American Express in for $5 [million]. We went to see New England Mutualand they said, “We don’t think we can get to $2 [million], but we’d like you togo down and talk to our friends at New York Mutual Life, MONY—Mutualof New York, that is. And we did. We went down to see them and we alsocalled on New York Life. I don’t think—New York Life didn’t do it, I don’tthink. But at any rate, we went down to see MONY and MONY had a veryinteresting reaction and it was largely because of this guy who was about—who was very equity-oriented but who was about to retire as head of theirinvestment department. He went before their finance committee, and theirfinance committee consisted of a bunch of—like ours really—a group ofCEOs of big major corporations. I can remember [Charles C.] Tillinghastfrom TWA was on their board and a bunch of people like that on theircommittee. One of their committee members said, “Well, you know,” and they had gonein with a recommendation that they invest $4 million in this fund. One of thecommittee members said, “Well, why don’t you invest $5 million and then getcontrol of the documents and you can write the agreement.” [chuckling]And—“All right, that sounds pretty good.” And they came out of that meetingand said to our friends at American Express, “You people are really not arm’slength investors here because of Reid’s prior association with you, so we’llwrite the agreement and we’ll represent the investors.” So I called back New England Mutual to thank them for the introduction toMutual of New York and said that Mutual of New York was going to put in$5 million and then they said, “Gee, if we invest a million, that means onaverage we’re in for $3 million apiece with Mutual of New York, so we’reabove your minimum! Can we get in?” [chuckling] So we said, “Sure.” So weended up with $19 million out of the $15-$20 [million] that we were aimingfor, and we would not have taken another million dollars from anybody else,so we wanted a small group of investors and that worked out extraordinarilywell—very, very well. They all felt as though they had a major ownershipinterest in our fund and then they participated.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So it was a wise investment. Dennis: Oh it was a very, very, very wise decision. And it’s too bad—that’s anotherthing that’s changed in this industry today. We had participants in this fundwho—when they’d get a distribution from us—if their original investmentwas big enough to be a legitimate portfolio holding, if they got a distributionfrom us from one of our successful investments—it was big enough, in eachindividual case it was big enough for them to pay some attention to it, put an 40analyst on it, understand what it is that they were getting in the way of newstock. I know that in the case of ROLM [Corporation], which was one of the bigsuccesses down here on the peninsula, early entrant into the digital telephonebusiness—in the case of ROLM, Mutual of New York still had something like60 percent of all of their ROLM stock when IBM finally bought them out.They just made buckets of money on that sort of thing. And in those days it was legitimate—at least it was possible—for us to callour investors and say, “Look—we’re about to distribute some stock in theXYZ company. One of us is on the board. We’re going to distribute the stockin kind, but I will tell you that my partners and I are going to continue to holdon to whatever we get as part of this distribution because we think thiscompany has a long ways to go.” And as a result of that, we madestockholders out of our limited partners who rode with us for a while. Today, if you distribute any in kind, all of your limited partners—there are somany limited partners they get a little dinky tiny piece of it. They don’t getenough to make it worth their while to spend any time analyzing it. They thinkof it as a liquidity event and they sell it. They just blow it out. So that is amajor change in the industry in the last twenty years, twenty to thirty years.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You mentioned partners in IVA who stayed. Dennis: IVA, right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Who were they and why? Dennis: Burt McMurtry.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And who is he? Where did he come from? How did you know him? Dennis: Well, Burt worked with Jack Melchor down here—you know, I don’t knowhow we got introduced to one another, but he was in the process of leavingMelchor, or had left him. And we met—Burgess Jamieson worked at Bank ofAmerica.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And you knew him? Dennis: You know, I don’t know how I knew him. That’s going back a long way—1973. That’s longer than I can remember! <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] Sorry. I’m just wondering why this particular group of men cametogether to form this new institution. Dennis: Well, I think we were all sort of interested in it because Jack Melchor hadbeen in the venture business and Burt worked for him, and so somehow wegot together. I think Burt may have known Burgess and that is the way it—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It might have been that way. Dennis: We got together that way.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And were there just the three of you partners? Dennis: There was a fourth partner in the beginning—Jim Norris who had worked forme at American Express. He came in as the junior partner. Unfortunately, hedied a few years later, so it was primarily the three of us.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is it relevant to talk about your early investments? Dennis: It is, but I’ll have to do some homework on that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Okay. Well, maybe— Dennis: Should we call it—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Should we stop now? Dennis: I think so. We’re at a place where we’re rambling a little.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] Okay. Dennis: And that’s my fault. But is that all right? [End Audio File 3]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Today is February 10, 2009 and this is the second interview with Mr. ReidDennis. We are in a different location this time, which we will talk about aswe move up through the chronology. Last time, we ended with your formationof IVA and talked about the first fund, but you mentioned just now off tape,that in the 1970s, which was when, if I’m remembering right—IVA wasfounded in 1973? Dennis: That’s—1973.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You said that the industry, the venture capital industry, of course, almost died. Dennis: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So why? [laughter] And what did that do to you? Dennis: Well, the industry died I think largely because of some changes in the taxlaws. President Nixon was the first one to raise the capital gains tax in adramatic way so that it moved up, and it was essentially up to the point whereit didn’t make any difference whether you were working for a job and payingincome tax or whether you were building an estate and building an asset andthen selling it and paying tax on the profit. The tax rates were very, very closeto the same. That really depressed anybody’s desire to invest in long-termprograms, and a venture capital investment is a long-term investment. These funds were typically—the first ones were set up for seven years.Certainly the first Kleiner Perkins fund was a seven-year fund. I think the firstMayfield fund was a seven-year fund, and I know that Draper, Gaither, andAnderson was a seven-year operation. It was largely not because the peopleinvolved thought that seven years was the right period of time—it was thatthey thought that was about as long as they could get people to sit still forletting them manage their money.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I was wondering that. Dennis: And really—we’ve had some funds now go on for fourteen and sixteen years,just because they have some valuable assets in them, there’s no liquidity in theasset, and you hate to throw it away.  We have one of our funds that has really one primary asset, and it’s acompany in the medical equipment business. They got into a bunch oflawsuits over their technology with people like Johnson & Johnson and others.They won those suits because Johnson & Johnson had infringed on theirpatents and they got so much money that came in as a result of having won thelawsuits that they don’t really need to go out and go public and raise money—they have more money than they know what to do with, but it’s still aprivately held company—a very successful privately held company. But itwould be a shame to—and our limited partners really don’t want us to justdistribute the securities to everybody, and they end up with a non-marketablesecurity.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Isn’t this some sort of marker for the maturation of the venture capitalindustry and the investor’s confidence in it? That they’re willing to leave theirmoney in the investment because there’s been enough history to show that, insome cases anyway, it pays off? Dennis: Well, the other thing also is that we’ve already given them back all of themoney they invested in that particular fund.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, all right, I see. Dennis: So they’re playing with the house’s money, so to speak. And we’re down tothe last—we’ve given them back and given them a good return on theirinvestment. So these last few things—troubled, now the word is toxic assets,but the last few troubled investments where you just cannot get liquidity andget marketability, they’re willing to leave them with us and let us worry aboutmanaging them because we know more about it than they do and they don’twant that headache. And when the funds get to be that old, we don’t chargethem a management fee, we just charge them whatever our expenses are, andour expenses are very minor. So in this one case of this one fairly successfulcompany, the company pays for board expenses and things like that, so there’svery little that comes out of the fund. And as I say, it was a fairly successfulfund. They got all their money back plus a nice return on it and they’re just—they’re very relaxed about leaving us with what’s left behind. But the thing that really killed the venture business was the fact that capitalgains rates had come up so close to ordinary income rates that it just did not—if you were a senior manager at Hewlett-Packard or one of the othercompanies up and down the peninsula here, it just didn’t seem like taking therisk to go out and start something new which might or might not be successful[made any sense], if you were going to get taxed on the profit at the same ratethat you’d get taxed working at your present job. So middle managers did not want to leave and start new companies, and that’s what really killed theprocess of starting new companies. I can remember clearly in one of our visits to Washington, DC and visitingwith an undersecretary of the treasury, on the back of his door as we walkedout of the office I saw a New Yorker cartoon, and this was in—probably in1977, in the spring of ’77. I’d moved the door so I could read the cartoon, andit was two people at a typical New Yorker cocktail party, two gentlementalking, and one of them said, “Venture capital. Remember venture capital?”That is about as far gone as you can get! It wasn’t until Jimmy Carter, bless his heart, came along—and with a veryunusual result—but he came along and said we should get rid of all of thedifferential between ordinary income and capital gains. They all ought to betaxed exactly the same. Well, they’d been nickel-and-diming us and taking alittle bit away at a time, and Carter came along and wanted to take the wholerest of the pie. And that one statement on his part galvanized the AmericanElectronics Association and the [National] Venture Capital Association intoaction. That’s when we began to really spend some time talking to theTreasury and to Congress and senators and so on in Washington, DC, andstarted a full-court press to, in effect, tell them that they were killing the goosethat was laying these golden eggs.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Which must have eventually gotten through, and I don’t know what thesequence was here— Dennis: I do. [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But in the later years—I’m sure you do—in the later years of the 1970s, theCarter Administration began to be worried about the U.S. losing outcompetitively, particularly against the Japanese. It would seem to me that itwould be a natural that you would try to promote an industry that, after all,was into innovation and new company formation and boosting technology andall of this American technology. Dennis: That’s true; I think that is absolutely true. You’d think—once the propositionis explained to people, they can catch it. They catch onto it very, very quickly.And there is no question about the fact that—and we’re coming up, right now,to revisit this whole argument, because there is so much static about what iscalled the private equity business, and they are going to increase the taxes onprivate equity. In the process of doing that they’re probably going to throw thebaby out with the bathwater and increase the taxes on venture capital, andthey’re not the same. That’s what almost killed us before and we’ve got to besure it doesn’t happen again if we can.  I think that the point you make though, about explaining it and aren’t we onthe same track, was absolutely the correct one, because in the fall of ’77 DavidMorgenthaler and I went to Washington, DC.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now you told a little of this last time. Dennis: Did I?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, you did. Dennis: About Wilbur Mills?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. Dennis: Okay, well, then that meeting with Wilbur Mills—he agreed with us. Heagreed with our arguments. He said, “Absolutely. But this isn’t going to comeup at this session of the Congress.” And yet eight months later we had a bill,and it was that bill reducing capital gains that came through in May of ’78 thatreally opened the floodgates of the venture capital business.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And do you credit the information that you were sharing? Wilbur Mills washead of the Ways and Means Committee? Dennis: He was chairman of Ways and Means.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you think that it was the education that you and Morgenthaler did that atleast were part of the reason that the winds began to change? Dennis: Well, we weren’t the only ones, because the American ElectronicsAssociation was back there telling the story also. And Ed Zschau, who washead of a small company here on the peninsula and later actually ran for andbecame a congressman, he was president of the American ElectronicsAssociation. He did a magnificent job of testifying before Ways and Means,and I’d say that that testimony, more than anything else, in March of ’78,really laid out the reasons in a very logical way. Out of Zschau’s testimonial,backed up by—well, I was there representing the venture capital industry andStan [Stanley C.] Golder was there representing the SBIC industry and SmallBusiness Investment Company industry. So all of these people were there andtelling this story, and I think that there is no question about it. We’re seeing itagain even today with our current financial crisis in 2009, that it’s better if the government can encourage private industry to create jobs, it’s better than thegovernment creating jobs that only last as long as the government is payingthe salaries.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And you got that message across. Dennis: And we got that message across.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yeah, and of course, in a sense you were helped, and I put that inmetaphorical quotes, by the changing culture of the times, namely this worrythat the United States was falling behind. Dennis: Oh I think that’s true. That’s true. An awful lot of innovation was comingfrom Japan and Germany, and there’s no question about the fact that there wassome concern about that. But I think that the real question was did we havethe incentives in place to motivate people to take risk, and I’m talking aboutmanagers getting out of a comfortable job in a big company going out andstarting something new because it was a good idea and going with it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So talk a little bit about what that spring of 1978 change in the capital gainstax—what was the immediate effect? Dennis: Well, the immediate effect was to create—an awful lot of new companiescame into the venture capital business. Had I known how many competitorswe were going to create, I don’t know that I would have necessarily workedquite so hard on trying to get the bill passed! [<|endoftext|>
Interviewer laughs] But clearly itwas the best thing to do. And then of course the capital gains rate was reducedagain in 1980 and that really opened the floodgates.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yeah. I believe you either said or I read that you said that you’ve believed that1980, until very recently, was probably the best ever year for IPOs? Or was itfor startups? Dennis: It was the best year to start a company.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Start a company. Dennis: [It] was 1980 because they’d reduced the capital gains tax, and managers wereleaving big companies and going off on their own in droves. That is whatreally opened the floodgates. It was the best year, I think. And it was a surprise, because when we raised a new fund in 1980, that was the first IVPfund, and that fund—we told our investors that we would only probably doone or two startups because they’re so time-consuming. We started off withjust a couple of partners and we didn’t have time to do a lot of startups. It turned out that in the next year after we started that fund, instead of doingone or two startups, we did six or seven startups because they were socompelling! We had entrepreneurs coming in and sitting around ourconference table and telling us a story that just captured your imagination asto what you could do. And of those—I think we only had one that really didn’twork out very well. So most of the others, out of seven, I think six of themwere wildly successful. So that was a great fund and that was the first IVPfund in 1980.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, maybe we should go back to IVA/IVP. I’m interested in what thesignificance is in the change in the names of the partnership. Dennis: Sure, sure. IVA—Institutional Venture Associates was started by BurtMcMurty, Burgess Jamieson, and myself. [brief interruption] At any rate, weran that fund from ’74 until 1980, and at that time Burt McMurtry decided hereally wanted to go off on his own, start his own fund. I was the guy that wasthe driving force behind getting IVA going, and so he wanted to start his ownfund. Burgess Jamieson wanted to take it easy for a while, and I wanted tokeep going. But they didn’t want me to continue to use the name IVA becausethey didn’t want it to look like continuity if there was no continuity. So I said,“Fine. I’ll change it. We’ll call it Institutional Venture Partners.” So the firstIVP fund was started in 1980 and we’re now up to IVP Roman numeraltwelve.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: My heavens! And you’ve been the general partner and manager of all thosefunds? Dennis: I’ve been a general partner, not the general partner. But I’ve been a generalpartner of all but IVP XII, IVP XII is the first one in the series that I’m just anadvisor, and it’s about time for this particular former venture capitalist toretire and get out of the way of the young people that are coming along.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How do you feel about that? Dennis: I love it! [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: More time for flying and San Francisco prints?  Dennis: And for prints, San Francisco prints, trying to find a home for all of the SanFrancisco prints that I’ve amassed over the last thirty-nine years—longer thanthat, isn’t it?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. Dennis: It’s longer than that. Seventy-three, so it’s—but anyway—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: There’s not a dearth of things to do. Dennis: Well, it’s thirty-six years, I guess. It’s the twenty-ninth year of IVP, and it’sprobably the thirty-sixth year, thirty-fifth year of the total thing. So it’s beenfun and interesting, but I have a lot of knowledge about some of these thingsthat I’ve collected over the years and I want to get that knowledgedocumented or written down before it’s gone.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yeah? Do you think of writing a book? Dennis: No. I’m not up to writing a book, but I have probably—one of my sons gaveme—I haven’t tried it yet—a machine that you can dictate into and it’ll typeout on the computer screen what you’re talking about. If that worksreasonably well then I might start using that. But I’ve written a number oflittle things that go around the walls in our offices saying pretty much what Iknow about certain prints, but there are certain prints that I haven’t yet had achance to deal with.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, would this be a good time to pick up on one or two, or perhaps eventhree companies that you think might illustrate some of your principles ofinvestment? Dennis: Sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Are they all in the forefront of your mind? Or shall I make some suggestions? Dennis: Well, no, they’re not all in the forefront of my mind, but there are certain onesthat stand out. You wanted both some successful ones and some unsuccessfulones.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I would like to hear also about the unsuccessful ones, yes.  Dennis: Well, in IVA, probably the one investment that did more for us than almostanything else was our investment in ROLM—R-O-L-M [spells], which was acompany that was an early entrant into the digital telephone business. Theydeveloped a telephone that was unlike any other, and Burt McMurtry was thelead on that. He knew the people at ROLM and brought them in, and we likedthem and we supported them and we made a major investment there. And westuck with it. It’s really interesting—when ROLM went public, the underwriter required usto sell some of our stock to help make it a true public market, so I think wehad to sell 5 or 7 percent of the stock we owned in ROLM, which we didn’twant to do because we thought this company had a long way to go. Well, itturned out—I can’t remember what year ROLM went public, but as it turnedout the stock came out and went down. So it went down and we went into theopen market and bought back what stock we had sold and a little bit more—and so we ended up with our position again. And we held onto that stock for along, long time. I think that we really had, I’d say a philosophy of looking out—you can onlylook forward maybe somewhere around eighteen to twenty-four months in ahigh-tech company. And we’d hope we could look forward two years and geta feeling for what the company was going to do. We would hope that wecould look at it a year later and extend our horizon again bit by bit.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And is that simply because, or not simply, but one of the reasons becausetechnology is just evolving so quickly? Dennis: Because technology is evolving and changing and you’ve got to keep up withit. And you get competitors and things do change.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yeah, so it’s different than selling cereal. Dennis: Oh absolutely, yeah, absolutely. But I think in this business, we put an awfullot of stress—in our organization—we put an awful lot of stress on themanagement team that was going to run the company. We rarely invested inone-man shows. I would say that one we did later, one of the 1980 ones was—I’ll get to—we did invest in a one-man show and I’ll have to get my mindcranked around to that one. But by and large we liked to invest in a team ofthree or four or five people, and we liked to have the feeling after interactingwith these people that we really would enjoy working with them. You haveenough choices in this business that you don’t have to work with everybody,and if you don’t think you’re going to enjoy working with somebody, forgetit—life’s too short. 50 Now that philosophy—this is one of the places where I have a very differentpoint of view than Don Valentine at Sequoia, because he says, “If themarket’s big enough, I’ll change the people.” Well, changing people is apainful thing for them; it’s a painful thing for you. As far as I’m concerned, Ithink there are better ways to get along in this life, and you can do very, verywell by betting on the best people and people that you’d enjoy working with. I can remember one company that we did that turned out not to be verysuccessful, and I can’t remember its name now, but Burt McMurtry said,“You know, these people are good enough that if this particular idea doesn’twork out, they’re going to come up with something else that’s going to workout. And that turned out to be true. The business changed quite dramatically aswe went down the road, but we continued to work with the people, enjoyedworking with the people, and it came out. It was all right. It was a goodinvestment. There are some other investments that you get involved in because ofemotion. I know I was involved at one company that was not terriblysuccessful. [It] was a company called Collagen Corporation, whose originalproduct was going to be an improved burn dressing for burn victims. I thinkone of the toughest things I ever did in terms of due diligence was to go downto the hospital in Santa Clara and go through the burn unit there. I had to getall scrubbed and gowned and masked and everything else, to see people thathad huge burns over—remember this was the time of the Korean War. The treatment of burn wounds was very much a cottage industry. One hospitalwould have one way of doing it, another hospital would have another way ofdoing it. There’s a big army hospital in Texas that had their own way of doingit. The principal material that was used at the time was pig skin, to coverplaces where there just was no skin at all. The problem was that after a while,after several days, the pig skin would start to get rancid, or not do its jobanymore and they’d have to take it off and put on a fresh dressing—extraordinarily painful to the burn victim. So these people had a great idea of coming up with this burn dressing madeout of collagen, which is the major component of skin anyway, and I thoughtthat was going to turn out to be successful. Well, it was never successful as aburn dressing. It turned out to be that it was more successful as something toget rid of wrinkles and divots and—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh really—which was not your motivation. Dennis: Which was not our motivation. We came out all right on it, but not anoverwhelming success. I know that for a while my partners used to refer toCollagen as our annual reinvestment opportunity, because the company had a terrible time trying to get to the point where it could support itself—but itfinally did.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now did that hold any lessons for you in terms of being motivated by emotionrather than the cold, hard statistics? Dennis: Oh sure, yeah, but on the other hand—no, it’s—I think that in my feeling,even today, it was worth taking the risk. Had we been successful with the burndressing, it would have been a wonderful thing for a huge number of people,and I’m sorry we weren’t. I really am sorry we weren’t. The management ofthe company was able to find some other things to do to make enough moneyto give us a payback and to give us a profit, but I think there are times whenyou have to say to yourself—it’s sad to have to go in to visit one of thesethings, but at least I got to see what the problem was, and I’m glad we gave ita try. I really am.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right. Well, it’s a perfect opening, as I see it to ask you whether one of themany things that I presume you consider in regard to a possible investment isthe social impact of the company. Does that enter into your thinking? Dennis: Well, the social impact—it rarely comes up, but I would say that there arecertain things that we probably wouldn’t do just because we wouldn’t be veryproud of being in that industry. So I would say, yeah, that it does have animpact, I think. We’re primarily interested in the high-tech field, but ifsomebody came along with a new pair of glasses that made everybody’sclothes invisible, I would say we probably would not invest in it. [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, you know, I associate, and I’d like to hear if you correct me, withventure capital and high technology—and of course I know that there areinstances where it’s not a high-tech company, but as a general rule do you seeit as not only in your partnership, but in others, that investments tend to be inhigh technology? Dennis: Well, it all depends on the firm, obviously, but our focus has been ontechnology. There’s no question about the fact that it’s been on high tech.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why is that? Dennis: Well, it was a field that we thought we knew. Burt McMurtry got his PhD inengineering; I got a degree in engineering. Burge Jamieson got his degreefrom—mine came from Stanford, a little school out in the West, and BurgeJamieson got his at MIT. So you had three partners that were all engineers. It was at a time when there were not a lot of—when we first got started it was atime when there were not a lot of people in the investment business that reallyunderstood high tech, who could sit down with a technician or a group offounders of a high-tech company, who could talk about their proposed planand their proposed product line or product area, where there were not a lot ofpeople in the financial industry that could understand what they were talkingabout. And yet if you had an engineering background, I think our biggeststrength was the fact that we understood what engineers were talking about. I never thought of myself as being a creative engineer. I’m not somebody whocould come out of thin air to create something that would be a gee whiz orwow kind of product, but I think that if I sat down across the table fromsomebody who had a gee whiz idea, I could appreciate what the market forthat product might be, how important it might be, and also how difficult it wasgoing to be for the founding team to actually solve the technologicalproblems. Now sometimes you can get too far ahead. You wanted me tomention something that didn’t work out very well.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What do you mean by too far ahead? Dennis: Well, there’s a saying that it’s easy to tell the pioneers, because they’re theones that have the arrows in their back! W invested in a company back inBoulder, Colorado called Reference Technology. Reference Technology hadthis idea of taking the 14-inch Sony videodisc and converting that into adigital storage machine. The idea of taking a videodisc and using it for digitalstorage was brand new! The problem with Reference Technology is that wewere probably five years ahead of the time we should have been, because theywere too early but they had a great vision. They said, “Some day we’re even going to distribute software to computerusers on discs! Now can you imagine such a wild thing!” I could not. How thedevil would you ever—going to distribute software on disc. Well, now wedistribute software over the Internet, but for a long, long time we used to goand get one of these little CDs and slip it in your computer and away youwent. But we were just too far [ahead], and these 14-inch discs werecumbersome. Then of course they came out later—Seagate came out with an8-inch hard drive, or I guess a 5-inch hard drive was—Seagate was—the firstone was a 5-inch hard drive. And then they kept getting smaller and smallerand smaller. Reference Technology was not a successful company. It had a greatmanagement team, good technology, but they were too far ahead of where themarket was. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, unpack that a little bit, because I think you’re on to something that’svery important—because it’s too early in what regard? It could be manythings—a supporting system, and then you’re mentioning that the laterproducts, I guess you could say, were more convenient, more efficient,because they were— Dennis: And smaller.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Miniaturized. But what about the people— Dennis: Well, there wasn’t enough of a market for people with a 14-inch disk drive.You just couldn’t make that market grow fast enough before suddenly IBMcame out with the 8-inch and then Seagate came out with a 5-inch.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see, so they broke the ice but they couldn’t— Dennis: They broke the ice and they sort of pointed the way. Other companies gotahead of them by coming out with smaller units sooner, before you could get afoothold in the industry. And of course, you could go too far the other way,too—because we went on down to smaller and smaller and smaller things, andwe finally ended up with a company called {MiniStore?}, that had a little,dinky disk drive—and that didn’t work well for us either. So we gotsnookered on both ends of that technological curve.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Thinking back to your testimony, if that’s the word, your lobbying inCongress where education, to put it simply, was one of the things or maybethe main thing you were trying to do—where does that fit in, if at all, here. Ifyou have a revolutionary new idea and then you’re going to pack informationon a disk, how much education do you have to do of the public, the supportingindustries, maybe your potential competitors—what goes into introducing abreak-through product?: Dennis: Oh boy. Can we take a break here? [interruption in recording]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [resuming recording]—taking a whack at that question I asked you? It will berephrased and don’t be intimidated [Dennis laughs] because I know it’s a hugequestion. Dennis: I can’t remember what it was. I just remember that I needed a break when Iheard the question. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I asked you something along the lines of what does it take to introduce a newtechnology—including the whole infrastructure that has to go around it andalso just public receptivity or lack thereof. Dennis: Sure. Well, I think by and large, introducing a new technology—we reallydon’t get involved with technologies that are going to go generally—didn’tuse to get involved, I should say, with technologies that were going to gostraight to the public, to the public market. Technology really was—the technological innovations usually found theirfirst markets in industry, in other companies—in other high-tech companieswho were doing a certain function, such as an IBM or—we used to use taperecorders for recording digital information on an IBM computer. It wouldhave rooms full of tape drives with these things roaring around, and the diskgoing back and forth. And of course, then when you come up with the harddisk, the first IBM storage disks were big, huge things again. So they had pioneered the idea of digital disk storage. For companies such asReference Technology, the reason that they were trying to break into that fieldwas the fact that here was a relatively inexpensive consumer product, meaningthe Sony audio disk player that maybe could be adapted. There was already amarket because IBM had gone out and sold a great number of machines atfairly fancy prices, and if you could come in with something based on Sony,so much the better. I’m trying to think—there was a company called Exabytein Boulder, Colorado, which was one that [spells] E-X-A-B-Y-T-E—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, I’ve got it here. Dennis: Exabyte—and Exabyte was taking a small Sony recorder—and I’m trying tothink what it was, whether it was a disk drive or a tape drive.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I have magnetic tape data storage products. Dennis: Okay, all right. Well, as tape recorders got smaller and were used mostly formusic and voice recording, Exabyte took a fairly small, inexpensive Sony taperecorder and made it into a data recorder. It was really sort of funny, because Iran across this particular company—it was located in Boulder, Colorado andwhen I described it to my partners, they thought I was absolutely out of mymind. So we all got in an airplane and went back to Boulder, Colorado and itwas the first time I think the whole partnership had ever gone anywheretogether like that. We all went back and after it was all over, we went backand spent a day at Exabyte, and they shook their head and said, “You know,you’re right. This thing has tremendous potential.”  And Exabyte was—they thought I was over the hill, or out of my mind orsomething—I can’t remember. But at any rate, they finally decided that, byGod, this was a good deal. So we made an investment, and Exabyte turned outto be fabulously successful for one of the early IVP funds. And indeed we putExabyte into some other funds also, so we helped the Stanford Engineeringventure capital fund by putting some over there, and it turned out to be a verysuccessful deal for us. But by and large it was taking existing technology and changing theapplication. But rarely—now with the pervasiveness of the Internet, it ispossible to distribute something to the public through the Internet in a waythat just did not exist early on. We didn’t have the Internet. Gee the first time Isaw an Apple computer—small, little desktop computer, I couldn’t figure outwhat the heck that would be used for. Who would want one of those?[laughter] And then, of course, when they got up to the point where gee, you can get awhole megabyte of storage on a disk or—I think—it’s hard to believe that weget things that were operating at certain speeds that we thought were veryadequate, and the fact that you had to wait five seconds before you brought upthe next window, it didn’t seem to bother you. But speeds kept getting fasterand faster and faster and faster. Now unless you’ve got umpteen gigabytes ofstorage and all these things—. It’s hard to believe, but the applications todaytake up so much more memory than we ever in our wildest dreams thoughtcomputers would ever use!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You know, it seems to me that in the way that you chose to work with peoplewith whom you were comfortable—can that also be said of the technology orthe business that you are investing in? That, if I’m understanding you right,when you say that in general you did not invest in companies or in productsthat went straight to the public—was that perhaps because then you’d have toget into a whole new realm of endeavor? Namely creating new markets anddealing with sales forces and all those things that I’m presuming you didn’thave experience with? Dennis: Well, we did not want to get into the consumer enterprises or consumerproducts, because there is a huge risk, not in—does the device work—butthere’s a huge risk in: Can you get it to the market and will the consumer buyit? But in most of these business to business technologies, you can always finda few customers here in Silicon Valley that will buy one of anything. They’llbuy one of anything and just try it and see if it works. And so they’re almosttaking too much risk not to try it, because if one of their competitors tries itfirst, then you’re in trouble if they like it. But more and more capacity, fasterand faster, faster and faster, more and more capacity, that’s been— <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was your technical background, your engineering background, allowing youto keep up with these changes on a technical basis? Dennis: It allowed me to keep up for quite a while. I’ll have to admit, maybe in the lastten years, I’ve fallen pretty far behind. My younger partners today talk aboutvarious products on the Internet that I just don’t have the slightest idea—creating virtual realities on the Internet and why people want to use them andall those sorts of things beats the dickens out of me. And I never reallythought that computer games would do what they’ve done. There are so manyconstructive things that you have to do in this world. Who’s going to sitaround playing—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: The answer is a lot of people! [laughter] Dennis: Yeah, I know! I know! I understand that; I understand that now. I didn’tunderstand it then that people would set aside other things for games, althoughI must admit that there was an early solitaire game that I loved to play on thecomputer, but unfortunately the company that made it didn’t keep up.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I notice, I think, that aside from Collagen—was that what it was called?That most of your investments, as far as I can discern, are not biomedical. Dennis: Well, as IVP grew, we went into the biomedical.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you? Dennis: Yeah, and we actually at one stage of the game split IVP into three groups.We had a biomedical group which was headed by Sam [Samuel D.] Colellaand Becky [Rebecca B.] Robertson and {add name }—oh my—and another partner.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You’ll get another whack at this. Dennis: That’s embarrassing. I can’t remember his name.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You’ll come up with it.  Dennis: And then we had what I would call a computer and communications groupthat was looking at startups, and then quite frankly Norm Fogelsong and I andMary Jane Elmore formed a group to do later-stage and public market.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Really—later-stage! Dennis: Later-stage and public market.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why would that be your predilection? Dennis: Well, partly it was a predilection because all the way back to IVA we alwayshad in our partnership agreement the ability to buy public stocks, but werestricted it to public stocks where we knew something about the company.That would be in the high-tech area. It wouldn’t be public stocks that ourlimited partners would feel comfortable buying on their own. But for instance,I mentioned to you that we had an investment in ROLM as a private company,and when it went public and the stock went down, we bought more. Webought it back again, and more. Well, an awful lot of venture capitalpartnership agreements do not permit the partners to buy public stocks.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Really, what is the rationale there? Dennis: Let’s talk about what was the rationale. The rationale for allowing us to buypublic stocks was the fact that I had spent twenty-one years at Fireman’s Fundand American Express managing public stock portfolios. And there weretimes when we wanted to be able to buy some of these less well known hightech stocks. We made a lot of money in them at Fireman’s Fund, buying little,dinky stocks. But at any rate, we bought some other high-tech stocks when themarkets were down the chute. Particularly if we were already an investor in it,had become an investor through the private—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You mean in the field or in the— Dennis: In that particular company.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh I see. Dennis: If we were a private investor in the company and then it went public and gotinto trouble or the market got into trouble—it didn’t have to be the companygetting into trouble—. We knew an awful lot about certain companies.  When Seagate—Seagate was one of our most successful investments in thefirst IVP fund—we made that investment in 1980 and it went public I think in1981, in the fall of ’81, we owned a lot of the stock and it came out and thestock went down. And we said, “Gee, this isn’t right.” Actually—I’m wrongon that. What happened is Seagate filed in the fall—and I’m not sure whichyear it was but I think it was ’81. In the fall of ’81 they filed to go public andthe original filing range was $18 to $20. And then we had a terrible decline inthe stock market, and the next thing I knew, they reduced the filing range from$15 to $18. And then the next thing I knew, they’d reduced it $12 to $14. Itwas supposed to come public the next week and then finally the next day. I called Tommy [Thomas I.] Unterberg at a firm called Unterberg andTowbin, who was one of the underwriters and I said, “Tommy, what’s theSeagate offering look like now? What’s the pricing look like?” And he said,“Reid—would you believe $10 a share?” And I said, “Tommy, would you likean order?” And he said, “Reid—that would be like manna from heaven!” Andso I said, “Well, we’ll give you an order to buy 50,000 shares at $10 a share.”And that’s what allowed the company to go public.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Wow. Isn’t that amazing.[End Audio File 4]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You were telling me about the $10 offering. Dennis: At Seagate.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. Dennis: Well, it’s—at any rate, so we gave Tommy Unterberg the order to buy 50,000shares, which is half a million dollars of Seagate stock. Our originalinvestment in Seagate had been—was a half a million dollars. But that was at50 cents a share. So there are a lot of investors, once they’ve paid 50 cents ashare would never think about buying something at $10. We owned this verylarge block of stock at 50 cents a share, and then in order to help with thepublic offering and also because we thought it was a good investment, webought the second tranche at $10. [cell phone ringing] So we held on to our$10 Seagate stock and in less than a year the stock was back up to $17, orsomething like that. Or I should say it was up to $17, and so we sold it. Wesold a high-cost stock and we made 70 percent on our money in less than ayear. That’s not a bad return. And we just held on to the low-cost stock.  And then finally on the third anniversary of the fund, we distributed theSeagate stock to all of our limited partners. Now this was the IVP I fund,which I think only had nine limited partners. But the thing that was interestingabout it, and it’s an interesting contrast with the world of venture capital as weknow it today, is at that time, on the third anniversary of the fund, we gave allof our limited partners back three times the amount of money that they hadinvested in the fund in terms of the value of the Seagate stock. Seagate all byitself gave them three times their money back. And that was extraordinary.And so from thereon out after three years, not only were we playing with thehouse’s money, but they had already gotten a very good return on it. And it’sremarkable to be able to do that in such a short time frame.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yeah, how did that compare to what other venture capital firms were doing inthat era? Dennis: Well, I don’t know. It has to be one of the more successful investments for thetime—1980 to ’83. But the thing that’s different about today is that our fundsare so big and we have so many limited partners that any one investment, evenif you’d made umpteen times on your money, by the time you distribute itamong all those limited partners, they have such a small holding that it’s notworth their time to learn something about it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, then why don’t the general partners limit the number of limitedpartners? Dennis: Because they want the money to get the management fees to—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But they could—well, this is naïve, I’m sure, on my part, but couldn’t it be setup in such a way that if you want to be part of this you have to invest thismuch at least? Dennis: Well, that’s true, and people do have minimums, but nevertheless, the fundshave gotten so big, they’ve gotten to be multiple hundreds of millions ofdollars or over a billion dollars—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But explain to me why that would be. Dennis: Because so many people want to invest in the venture capital business, andthat’s different than it used to be. We had to struggle in the first IVA fund toraise $19 million in 1973-’74. It was much easier, but our first IVP fund in1980 was a $22 million fund. Because of the success with Seagate, we never 60took down the whole $22 million; we only took down three quarters of it. Butfunds were relatively small then. It was the success of the eighties that got everybody and their brotherinterested in investing in the venture capital field. And so a whole group ofinvestors—pension funds and state funds and so forth and so on began to getinterested in this area, and then of course, there was the change in the PrudentMan Rule that allowed pension funds to invest freely here.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But I would also think there was your record of success. Dennis: There was a record of success which was great while funds were small—andit was spectacular. And now there are still some funds that have hadspectacular records: those that invested in Google were spectacular. There arevery few Googles, you know. There are very few really big home runs likethat, but if you look at the history of financial bubbles over the centuries,whatever has been very, very rewarding for a good period of time usuallyattracts too much capital and the returns go down. And that’s exactly what’shappened to the venture business.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And also true, would you say, of the roaring nineties? Dennis: That’s absolutely true of the roaring nineties, sure. The nineties were a greatperiod up until the very end, till the bubble burst in 2000.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I have several questions in mind, but would you also say that the orientationof the new venture capitalists coming in, or maybe it wasn’t just the new—butinstead, as you’ve made so clear, that part of venture capital is building thecompany, sticking with it, if you’re going on the board making sure as bestyou can that this company is going to be a success. Has that kind oforientation changed in recent years? Dennis: I think it has in that there are so many people investing today in companiesthat they are—they’re trying to build the companies in order to sell them tosomebody else, instead of building the companies to last.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Getting their money back. Dennis: You know, it’s a question of built to last or built to sell. It used to be that wewere trying very, very hard to build something that would last and last andlast. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Does that still characterize your philosophy? Dennis: I don’t think you can do that today in the same way because there are so manyother things that come into play.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Like what? Dennis: The demand for liquidity on the part of your limited partners and—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And you can’t talk them out of that? Dennis: No, oh no.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why, why? Dennis: Because they have their own performance records to show to their financecommittee.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So everything’s interlocked. [chuckling] Dennis: And as you get bigger and people’s investments are smaller—we gave ourlimited partners so much Seagate that they had to learn something about it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Exactly. There’s no incentive. Dennis: If you just give them a little—you give them a little dab—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: They don’t care about the company. Dennis: They don’t care about the companies. They get a little dab of this and a littledab of that and someone says, “Well, why don’t you just sell the stock in thefund instead of distributing in kind.” Well, in many cases, because you have aconcentrated block in the fund, you’re subject to all sorts of restrictions onhow much you can sell in any period. You’ve got to report it all. Somebodysees—Oh they’re selling, they’re beginning to sell—that means there’s goingto be pressure on the stock for the next year and a half while they try toliquidate and get out of it. You’re much better off distributing it, and hopefully trying to distribute it in a good market where there’ll be receptivityto it. But it’s—there’s a lot that has changed, so it’s anyway—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All right. Let’s see. Would you say, and this is another probably impossiblequestion because you kind of implied it already, that your investment strategyor your investment style, however you want to characterize it, has changedwith the times? If that indeed is true, are there certain core principles, corevalues that you insist on holding on to? Dennis: Well, number one, you’ve got to remember that I’m not a general partner inthe current fund. So I don’t want to speak for the current fund.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: No, all right, well, don’t bring it up that far, then. Dennis: But I would say that certainly through IVP X, we continued to invest in thesame way. [IVP] X and [IVP] XI. We’re still looking for the same sorts ofthings, but it’s hard—it’s hard to stick with exactly the same rules that youused to apply, when the world around you has changed as much as it has. Soyou’ve got to play the game the way the rest of our industry is playing thegame. We used to have a lot of time to make up our mind. We used to have—I meanrelatively to what is true today. We used to have more time; we put muchmore emphasis on knowing the people and being comfortable with the people.We still put a lot of emphasis on the people, so that hasn’t changed. Butyou’ve got to make up your mind about the people in a hurry because thereare so many competing firms now, and if good people started going aroundraising money, if you don’t jump on it and get after it right away, you maylose out. Plus the fact that the other thing that has changed is that we used to have to domore or less our own due diligence. It was our own thoughts about atechnology or an area. Today with the Internet, there is a huge amount ofinformation available on almost any subject that you can think of. It’s like—go research this area or that area—it’s like opening a fire hydrant. There’s atremendous volume of information that comes at you, and so you’ve got tohave analysts to sort through all of this stuff and summarize it. You’re on amuch faster timetable, and it’s much less of a personal business today than itused to be.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yeah, it sounds like [it]—how do you feel about that? Dennis: I’m glad I was in it when it was more of a personal business. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] Right, I bet. What about IVP’s reputation, though? Not only haveyou been around longer than most of your competitors, but you have, as I’vesaid before, a record of success so that when you’re competing forinvestments, investors, doesn’t that give you a leg up over many? Dennis: Oh it does, no, no. I think that the fact that IVP is a well known name; it’sInstitutional Venture Partners; it’s been around for a long, long time and theyknow that. I think the other thing is that IVP raised Roman numeral X in theyear 2000. That’s nine years ago. Venture capital firms are sort of measuredby vintage year—when was the fund started, what’s the rate of return been?Well, the year 2000 was the year the bubble burst. IVP X is one of the fewfunds in the nation that has returned all of its original capital and has apositive result. There are other funds, most of the other high-tech funds lostmoney for their investors. So to be a partner in a group of funds that has a2000-vintage year fund that made money, separates you from the pack. So it’san indication that I’ve done pretty well in selecting my successor partners.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, it does. Dennis: And that we as an organization have done a good job of bringing youngerpeople into the firm, and they’re doing a good job. That’s about all you canleave them with is trying to bring bright, young people in and let them havetheir head and see what happens.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Again, I think you probably have answered this, [Dennis chuckles] but I’ll askyou the questions anyway. Talking as a venture capitalist, or looking atyourself as a venture capitalist—and I know you’re many other things—whatdo you think are your greatest strengths and perhaps your areas of weakness. Dennis: Well, I think that the venture capital business is something that—it’s abusiness that it really pays off to come into it after you’ve had a fair amount ofexperience doing something else. I think it’s a business that you’re probablybetter off entering in your thirties and forties than you are entering it in yourtwenties, because you need to build a frame of reference by which to judgepeople and to judge opportunities and to be able to judge markets and what’sgoing on in the economy. So that I think that—let’s see—I was in my, I guessin my forties when we started the first IVA fund as an independent fund. I’dhad the experience of working, doing venture capital investing both atFireman’s Fund and in American Express before I came down here.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And on a personal level in {unclear}.  Dennis: And on a personal level. So you have to build that frame of reference thatallows you to sit down across the table from somebody.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I would think so. Dennis: And be able to make some judgments as to whether—is this person really—he’s probably telling me the truth. He or she, telling me the truth as they see it.Are they capable of doing what it is they say they’re going to do?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yeah, now is that intuitive? Dennis: An awful lot of that is intuitive. It’s intuitive and it comes about through justexperience. You can’t build that frame of reference and get that experienceunless you’ve been around for a while. And particularly, I think it’s a mistakefor people to jump out of college and say, “I want to go into the venturecapital business.” Because typically the entrepreneurs are going to be slightlyolder than you are. Not always, but slightly older. If you’re dealing with agroup of entrepreneurs that are six or eight or ten years older than you are,they’re going to say, “I want somebody on my board of directors who hasmore experience than I have, not less experience.” And so—you’re a betterboard member; they’re more liable to take your advice and counsel if you seesomething that they should be doing. I don’t think you have to have,necessarily, gray hair, and you don’t have to have as little hair as I have, butnevertheless, it’s important that you do have some experience.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Nobody so far, of the people I’ve interviewed, has talked about the process oftaking a company to the public market. Are there some generalities, or wouldit be easier for you if you talked about a specific company that might beillustrative? I want to know the context, how the decisions are made that thiscompany is ready to take to the market, and what you’re looking at to makesuch a decision, because I imagine it’s more than just where the company is. Dennis: Well, it is, yeah, it is. It’s usually—the process of going public usually startswith the fact that the company is growing fast enough that it needs to raisesome additional capital. We typically will invest in a company for two or threerounds; we like to support our companies. If we get in early, we’ll invest inthe second round and third round. And as I say, in the case of Collagen, mypartners used to refer to it as our annual reinvestment opportunity [<|endoftext|>
Interviewerchuckles], but after a while, the company’s needs, if it is growing, thecompany’s needs gets beyond the capabilities of the venture capital firm tocontinue to support it in a meaningful way, and then you should turn to thepublic.  Plus the fact that if they’ve done it the way most companies do, you have agreat number of stockholders that are within the company, that are actuallyworking in the company, and they want some liquidity. They have wives andchildren and pets and things that need to be supported. The wife wants tobuild another wing on the house or buy a new car, so there’s a pressure for afree market in the stock or a public market in the stock that would allowemployees to get some liquidity. And then there’s also the pressure on the part of the venture capitalists to beable to give a marketable stock out to their investors where they can make thatdecision as to whether they hold it or sell it. It also gives—in some cases, it’llgive the venture capitalists the opportunity to say, distribute the stock to all ofthe partners including the general partners. And the general partners may beso close to the company that they want to hang on to it. And you can do that—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Really—that’s been your experience? Dennis: That’s—well, it used to work that way. Now there’s so much pressure put onany market, any time a new market is created for a stock it is very, very hardfor it to perform well because there is so much pressure for liquidity. Part ofthat is from investors who—we have many, many limited partners who areinvested in a lot of venture capital funds, and they have a lot of capital callscoming periodically. Not all the time, but periodically they have more capitalcalls because we don’t take down all the capital on day one. You take it downover usually over a three- or four-year period. So they have pressure on themto supply new money to funds they are already in; they’d like to get somemoney back from their current investments and recycle those dollars.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. Excuse me for interrupting. But where, if at all, does the state of themarket figure into all this? Dennis: Oh well, it figures very prominently in it, because if the market isn’t doingwell, you cannot take or you should not take a company public in a marketthat’s about to tank or is very unstable. One of the problems that we had with the Seagate example that I gave youwas we were going to go public in a market that turned out to be undertremendous pressure, and it went down, down, down, down. It was partlybecause somebody who wrote a market newsletter, who was very, verynegative on the market, made a tour around Europe and kept telling everybodythat the world was coming to an end and coming to an end and coming to anend. Every time he gave a speech, the market went down just that muchfurther. So it was a terrible time to go public, but they needed the money andso they went public. They ended up selling the stock at a lesser price than they had hoped to, but nevertheless it was a successful offering. The stock neverwent down after it came out at $10 a share, so all the public stockholdersmade money. I think that’s something else that has changed today is that we’ve had an awfullot, in the recent two years, really, we’ve had a number of companies gopublic that have never seen—come out and gone down and have never seenthat price again. And that’s too bad because what we’ve done is we’ve sort ofsoiled our own nest in that the public gets tired of buying stocks that go down.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] Yes! Dennis: And I don’t blame them! I don’t blame them. I wouldn’t want to do thateither. If our industry keeps pushing things out the door, and the publicdoesn’t want to buy them and they go down, they’re going to walk away fromus. So there has been some of that going on.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, we were going to end with the current state of the market, but it seemsto me that there’s a segue into that discussion right now if you want to saysomething briefly about what the current economic downturn is doing to theventure capital industry. Dennis: Well, we’re in the beginning of 2009, this is February of 2009, and the markethas been very, very volatile. But I think that what really is going on today isthe fact that the whole economy is in terrible shape. This is the fastestdownturn in the economy that we have ever experienced since the GreatDepression. It’s the fastest, the sharpest; unemployment is going up fasterthan it has for a long, long time, and I think it’s going to be quite a whilebefore any new high-tech companies can go public and have a good result forthe public investors. Now having said that, we see a number of public stocks—way back in thebeginning, way back in the fifties and sixties we used to—when the high-techmarket was just beginning to become known—and you have to remember thatwhen I got out of school, there were no publicly held electronics companieson the peninsula, so this whole thing was a relatively new phenomenon. WhenHewlett-Packard went public, David Packard recommended that people sellthe stock because he thought it was overpriced. And of course here hecouldn’t have been closer to the company—and he couldn’t have been morewrong! People that disregarded his advice and bought the stock and held ontoit made a lot of money. But nevertheless, back in those days, we used to say that if you could buy—you couldn’t look at earnings; you couldn’t look at price to earnings ratios because these companies were growing so fast they were out in front ofearnings. They were plowing money in and investing money into things atsuch a rate that it was hard for them to earn money. So you had to relate thevalue of the company as represented by the stock price to sales, to the revenueof the company. We used to say if a company was growing rapidly, and youcould buy it today at one times sales, or maybe 1.2 times sales, or 1.3 timessales, you had a pretty good chance of making money as sales kept going up,if you were convinced sales would go up and you ignored the earnings of thecompany and just looked at sales. A couple of years ago I can remember sitting around the table and listening tosome of my younger partners say, “Gee, this company looks like a pretty gooddeal because it’s only three times sales, or four times sales, or five timessales.” [chuckling] And I’d have to wince and say, “Gee it really looks good atthree or four times sales.” Well, we now are back to the point where you’relooking at price to sales ratios of again we’re back to about 1.5 times or 1.2 or1.3 times sales. I think we’re back to the point where there are a lot of hightech companies that are rapidly growing companies that are pretty attractivelypriced today. Now can they get overpriced again? Sure, yeah, they can. But Ithink that when you can buy things at say, say less than 1.5 times sales intoday’s market, that’s a pretty good long term investment if you’re right onthe future of the company and the growth in sales.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What do you do in a down market, though, about the momentum that youtalked about, to get liquidity? Dennis: You’d better get liquidity on the way up. You’ve got to have liquidity on theway up and you have to have more capital that you can draw on. You’ve gotto keep some powder dry for times like these. We’re glad, my partners areglad they haven’t taken down all the capital in IVP XII yet, and we still havesome capital to call on and some investments to make at these lower levels.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So it sounds as though IVP anyway isn’t drastically hurting. Dennis: Oh things could get better, but—we’re not drastically hurting because we haveliquidity. What we really have going on in our country today is an incredibleliquidity crisis where people who have gotten used to, during the past twentyor thirty years, they’ve gotten used to a certain pattern with their banks of—ifI have this kind of a deal I can go to my bank and I can get that kind of moneyand I can carry on my business. Now you go back to the same bank with thesame kind of deal, the same sorts of terms, you’re in the same business, andthe banks say, “We don’t want to lend you the money.” We’ve got a liquiditycrisis that has frozen up the banks in a way that has never happened before inthe fifty-five years that I’ve been in business. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yeah, not since the Depression. Dennis: Not since the Depression.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, switching subjects—or do you want to say more on the currentsituation? No? Because I’m thinking of you and your colleagues in venturecapital as barometers, if you can use that term, of the state of new business,and in your case, anyway, high technology, at least in the region that youconsider for investment. In other words, a repository of new knowledge. Andwhat does that really mean? Is that a service or an advantage—I don’t knowquite the words to use—that should be more widely utilized than simply—okay, deciding that I’m going to invest in this company or that? Dennis: I’m not sure that I understand the question. Try it again.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, it seems to me, because presumably—or maybe I should ask thatquestion—reading business plans must be part of the job, right? Dennis: Oh sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That seems to me a source of knowledge, and a source of knowledge aboutvery specific innovative technologies in a way that I can’t imagine quiteanother parallel source of information. I’m not quite sure where I’m goingwith this question either, but you—with my looking at it very narrowmindedly—you’re using that information to decide whether I’m going toinvest in this company or I am not. But it seems to me that knowledge, thatbulk of knowledge—if you multiply it by the number of venture capital brainsthat are absorbing this information—that it’s a tremendous pool of financial,technical, business information that it seems to me could be used for otherpurposes. Dennis: Well, let me back up for a minute and say that there have been a number ofinnovations that have come along that have had a major impact on industryand economies. Certainly, one of the reasons we have steam engine modelsaround here is the fact that the invention of the steam engine and the fact thatit allowed people to do more than just muscular work—they could improve ontheir own muscular strengths and use machines to do work. And then, ofcourse, the development of the electric grid, so to speak, was another stepforward in terms of energy for people. Certainly the switch from the horse andbuggy to the automobile was a major innovation. It’s interesting to take andplot, on a logarithmic scale, the distance that one person can travel in one dayversus time. The reason the California Missions are all about thirty-five miles apart is the fact that that was about as far as a person could ride a horse in oneday; that’s about the maximum. And then, of course, along comes theautomobile. Now the bankers in New York were very, very skeptical about the automobile,and they thought it was a European fad that would never catch on in thiscountry. You go back and you read or listen to some of the history of HarveyFirestone talking about the development of the automobile and the rubbertire—it was hard to get financing because the New York bankers just felt thiswas not going to last.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because the distances were too great? Dennis: No, because the horse and buggy was so reliable, you know!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh I see, and why would you want to go— Dennis: And we didn’t have roads! You didn’t have any roads; we didn’t have 280 andwe didn’t have all these—so things relate to one another. Now in our time, of course, we’ve had—first you had the development of thevacuum tube in the early part of the last century, and that brought on radiosand things like that and eventually television. But then huge innovation cameout of World War II, and we developed radar and microwaves and things likethat, and frequencies that we’d never dreamed of generating before—higherand higher and higher and higher frequencies. And, of course, in our time, inthe time that we’ve been in the venture business, the biggest innovation hasbeen the development of the microprocessor, and it’s gotten faster and fasterand faster and smaller and smaller and smaller. But the major hurdle, themajor innovative breakthrough has already occurred in that area, andcomputers will continue to get smaller. Computers will still continue to getmore powerful. But it’s going to be evolutionary, looking forward, rather thanrevolutionary. I think probably the next big innovative changes are going tocome in the biomedical field rather than the electronics field.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And why do you say that? Dennis: Well, because we have so many unsolved problems in the biomedical field.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And you’re implying that the others are evolutionary. 70 Dennis: Yeah, and I think we still have unsolved problems in the biomedical field thatare available for pioneers and experimenters to still innovate in. I think we’relearning more and more and more about the human body all the time. Sothere’s an awful lot to be done in that field in combating disease, whereas Ithink that what’s going on in the electronics industry is going to be muchmore evolutionary. Sure we’ll go faster, and sure it’ll broader; everybody willsoon be connected to everybody else—and it’s going to be terrible! [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, this is a wonderful discussion, but I think in the interest of time weshould move on to such things as the wider context. I’m wondering—youknow you spoke very well about how some of the legislative changes at theWashington level had had a huge impact. Are there other things of that naturethat—either at the governmental level or I don’t know quite what else—thathave had a direct shaping effect on the way venture capital has evolved? Dennis: Well, we’ve talked about capital gains already.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, we have. Dennis: That’s terribly important. I think that one of the things—there are someproblems with the tax laws that need to be corrected. I hope in the process offixing some of the problems that exist today that they don’t start raising thecapital gains tax again on venture capital firms, because I think that’d be amistake. Now the current rate is 15 percent. I don’t think it makes anydifference at all whether that rate is 15 percent or 20 percent. But you getmuch above 20 percent and then that tax begins to be a tax that preventstransactions from taking place. It becomes a block to transactions; peoplewon’t sell something because they don’t want to pay the tax, or it becomes atax on inflation—if we ever get to the point where we have an inflationaryeconomy again. But if people bought a house a long, long time ago, and ifthey sell it today an awful lot of the profit is just keeping up with inflation—and should that be taxed? So I think that there are two directions to go here. As I say, I don’t think itmakes—I think anywhere from 15 to 20 percent is perfectly acceptable, andit’s not an economic impediment to the redeployment of capital to its mosteffective use. And that’s what we’re really talking about. The capital gains taxis a tax that, if it gets too high, will prevent the redeployment of the capital toits most effective new use. There’s no point in reducing it further, because the capital gains tax—it’sinteresting—you look at this history. When it was reduced from 48 to 28 andfrom 28 to 20 [percent], the actual capital gains revenues went up because there were more transactions! I don’t know what happened from 20 to 15, butobviously if you go to zero, revenues are going to go to zero, so there’s nojustification for taking the capital gains to zero. I think that’d be a big mistake.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is there talk of that? Dennis: Well, there’s talk about maybe you reduce it to zero for one year. Well, that’sterrible! Because that makes everybody short-term investors or something.And there are people in long-term projects who need to sell when the righttime is, and you shouldn’t have the tax laws determine the timing of the saleof some asset. So I am perfectly happy to see capital gains, long-term capitalgains for the venture industry in this range of 15 to 20, and I’m not going toargue whether it’s 20 or 22 or 18, but nevertheless, it’s in this range. It shouldnot go down to zero. The other point is that in trying to fix certain problems, the taxing authoritieshave really fouled up the tax on stock options, and that should be corrected.One of the things that really made Silicon Valley as successful as it has turnedout to be was the fact that for a long, long time stock options were available.Stock options are a way of allowing employees all through an organization tobecome partial owners of that organization. Well, some big companies—and the worst offender was Chrysler in givingLee Iacocca options on millions and millions of dollars worth of stock. Inorder to prevent that and the favorable tax treatment on people like Mr.Iacocca, who was really getting compensated for a job—it wasn’t toincentivize him to become an owner of a large block of Chrysler stock. But in order to correct that problem they changed the rules on stock options sothat now instead of being able to exercise your option and hold on to thestock, now if you have an option to buy stock at $10 and it goes to $50 andyou exercise the option at $10 and you own the stock at $50, you are liable forthe tax on the day you exercise it at the $50 price. If it goes back down to ten,you still owe your tax on the 50 bucks, and you don’t have it anymore. So itreally forces employees who have stock options to, in effect, sell their stockwhen they exercise it because they can’t afford the risk that it could go downand they would owe the tax at a higher price.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see it. When did that tax law come in? Dennis: Oh a couple of years ago.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Really?  Dennis: Yeah, and it’s something that really needs to be corrected, because theyshouldn’t have to pay the tax until they sell the stock and then the tax ought tobe due on the price they get when they sell the stock. That’s the way it used tobe and that’s the way it should be, and that’s why virtually everybody atHewlett-Packard was a stockholder. All the employees were stockholders, andbroad stockholdings in the high-tech companies has been a hallmark of ourindustry. During the most successful parts of our recent history, it’s one of thethings that really made it work and people all felt, goddangit, I’ve got anownership position here, and this is my company as well as your company andyour company and your company.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right, yeah, and so all that motivation you had lost. Dennis: Now it’s lost. It’s absolutely lost. And you’re just scared to death that if youdon’t get out while the getting is good, you’re going to end up owing the tax.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is the idea that is so prevalent and has been as far as you’re saying for somany decades in Silicon Valley—that employees have stock options andhence an incentive to contribute and stay at a company—is that a West Coastidea? I know that the big firms elsewhere used to give their executives [stockoptions]. But as far as I know it wasn’t a policy that every employee in acompany got stock options. Dennis: No, and it still isn’t. You have to be there a certain period of time; you mayhave to be at a certain level.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But if you’re a dishwasher? Well, maybe a dishwasher isn’t a good—becausethey’re often concessions. Dennis: {Franchises?}, yeah. But no, no, no, there have been requirements that youhad to be an employee for a year or a year and a half—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But it’s not—what I’m trying to get at though—it’s not a discrimination onthe basis of your status in the company. Dennis: It hasn’t been, no.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: No, but I believe it has—originally.  Dennis: Well, it can be. It all depends on how broadly you want to do it. But HewlettPackard did it very broadly, Varian did it very broadly. Varian wanted all oftheir employees to be stock holders, and that was one of the ways they coulddo it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yeah, have you been in a position to give new companies advice in that veryarea? Dennis: Oh well, we usually do, yeah.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And what do you— Dennis: Well, you know, right now under the tax laws, it’s hard to know—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What to say. Dennis: —what to do, because I think it’s become pretty standard in our industry thatyou get fairly broad distribution of stock among—certainly among keyemployees, and then push it down as far as you can.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [to videographer] Ten minutes, period? Dennis: Okay, we’ve got to wind up.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: We’re running out of tape. Sorry about that. Let’s say something aboutCalifornia as a setting for at least one, if not the, major center for venturecapital in the world, on the planet. Dennis: Sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What influence, if any, has that had? Dennis: Oh I think that a lot of people have come to California and come to the BayArea and said, “Gee, we’d like to duplicate what you’ve done out here insome other part of the country or some other part of the world.” Well, the firstthink that they’d have to do is duplicate our weather.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] And they’re not going to do that.  Dennis: And that’s the hard thing to do. But by and large, talking about the technologyindustry, which is the one I know best, the centers have grown up around MITand Harvard. They’ve grown up around University of Michigan in Ann Arbor,and they’ve grown up around the Golden Triangle down in Raleigh-Durhamand—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Chapel Hill. Dennis: And Chapel Hill. And so they’ve grown up around universities. In the BayArea there are two competing centers—there’s a small one over in Berkeleyand then there’s the big one around Stanford, of course. [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I don’t know that I agree with that! Dennis: Well, I know, I don’t expect you to agree with it, but nevertheless—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: There is also UCSF, which is not known as exactly a laggard in this area.[laughter] Dennis: Sure, no, I know. At any rate, but we’re so lucky that we’re in the Bay Areawhere by and large we’ve had fabulous weather. And the weather does play arole here, because during World War II a tremendous number of people wentthrough California on their way to the Pacific, and they determined that theywere not going to go back to the Midwest. My gosh, you don’t have to shovelsnow, and all that sort of thing—you mean you never have to shovel snow?And look at what’s happened recently with the ice storms in the East. It’s justbeen miserable, so the weather has had a big impact. And then it’s a question of the university environment and in our case wewere blessed to have Fred Terman at Stanford, who really was the father ofradioengineering in many respects. He wrote the handbook, he wrote thetextbook, he gave lectures on it. He was the one who encouraged Hewlett andPackard to start their company; he was on their board for, I guess, his wholelife. He was a charming, energetic, and encouraging kind of person, and heloved to encourage people to start new things. I think that Lee de Forest, whodeveloped the first vacuum tube that had three elements in it, called a triode—his laboratories were down in San Jose. The Varian brothers that reallydeveloped the klystron that helped make radar a practical tool during WorldWar II—that was developed here. So these centers of high-technology development that have attracted venturecapital have grown up around universities. I think the same is true in England where I know at Cambridge there has been some innovation—less at Oxford, Ithink—a little stuffier. But it’s—but I don’t think you can necessarily exportwhat we have here. The other advantage that we have in this country versus the rest of the worldis the fact that we have—what is it—230 million people in the United Statesnow? Something like that? And we all speak, almost, the same language. Nowthere are some people from Texas that don’t know how to speak the language,but at least if we’re patient with them we can usually understand what it wasthey meant to say. I’m not thinking of anyone in particular.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I bet you are! [laughter] Dennis: But some one of the comics said that he was trying to quote George W. Bushand said, “Mr. Bush is alleged to have said—‘it’s too bad the French don’thave a word for entrepreneur.’” [laughter] I’m afraid that that’s not a truestatement, but nevertheless—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It’s a nice one. Dennis: It’s a typical kind of thing that he could do. We have three minutes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: There’s a lot been written and spoken about the so-called unique culture ofSilicon Valley in this area. Do you subscribe to that? It’s termed in adjectivessuch as it’s not risk-averse and— Dennis: Can do!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And can do and move on and speed and collegiality. Dennis: Look—we’ve had just a huge number of success stories here, and so I thinkthat that culture does exist. Plus the fact that this became a mecca for venturecapital firms because so many small companies were growing up around here.We started—one of the investments we made was in a company calledCorbin-Farnsworth, which now is the medical-electronics division of Smith,Kline & French. And it started in a little dinky warehouse over here off ofPage Mill Road; some guys just trying to take technology and apply it to newthings. Go down and visit it, like the people—“Sure, we’ll get the money.”That attitude has pervaded this area—of starting new things. And it feeds onitself because by and large over the last fifty years it has been a very, verysuccessful activity. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, [abrupt end].
