Interviewer: Let’s begin with your grandfather. Can we call him a venture capitalist? Draper: No, that was my father. We are three generations of venture capitalists: myfather, William H. Draper, Jr., myself, and my son, Tim Draper, who foundedDraper, Fisher, and Gurvetson.Here’s the history. My great grandfather came over from Canada to Michigan.He was a farmer and a preacher—minister. He was James Draper, andWilliam Draper was his son, who left Michigan and went, in the late 1800s, toNew York and started as a dentist. I don’t think they went to school then.They just bought a book or some papers on how to pull teeth. He moved toHarlem and he met my grandmother. She signed on as his bookkeeper andadministrative assistant—not a nurse. I’ve temporarily lost them, but I have two letters, one from him saying, “Ilooked in the mirror this morning, and I was the happiest man on earth. Youjust told me yesterday that you would marry me.” It was addressed to MissCarey. It went on and on about how they were going to have such a wonderfullife together, and it was an amazing letter. It was signed Dr. Draper. Her letterto him, very perfunctory, “Dear Dr. Draper, I’m so pleased with my owndecision to marry you, and I know we’ll have a wonderful life together.”[laughter] Those two letters are such a match up for that age. They had threechildren, and my father was the oldest. He started in a commercial bank inNew York, the First National Bank. Then he went to Dillon, Read investmentbanking firm in New York<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was his background in business? Draper: He was an NYU graduate. Young man. Business schools weren’t the thing atthat time. We’re talking about 1917 or something like that. He got interestedin more than economics, though. He was part of the Ford Peace Ship but thencame back and was an officer in the World War I, just at the tail end of WorldWar I. Young man—and then every summer, he kept his commission alive bygoing to Plattsburgh Camp up in New York State. At one time during thethirties, I can remember he drove our car up, and they put “Tank” on it, andthey had wooden guns. That was the state of our army training in the thirties. But he was very ahead of the curve on figuring out that war was coming. Sohe signed up, went to Washington in 1939, I think. He signed on with General[Lewis Blaine] Hershey. General Hershey was in charge of the draft. I guessthis was 1940 and he moved to Washington. I was in high school at the time—not quite in high school, I guess, in 1940. He, at that time I think, was acolonel. He got very involved in Washington. He was sent to the Pacific totrain a division, but they never got sent into action. He was in Hawaii. Then he came back from the war. Right after the war, he was then a one-stargeneral, and he went to Germany, to Berlin, as the economic advisor, becausehe’d had a lot of investment banking, all through the thirties. Tough time inthe investment banking world, by the way.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, I can imagine. Draper: Part of his job was to close up two or three offices of Dillon, Read that wereout of New York City. But he was economic advisor to General [Lucius D.]Clay for about three or four years, starting as soon as the war was over. Fortyfive till 1948, when Truman asked him to be the undersecretary of war. Therewas no defense department, so there was just secretary of the navy andsecretary of war which had the air force; it was called the army air corps. Hewas undersecretary of war in 1948. One of the connections I had at that time, and one of the thrilling things in myhistory, was that he asked me to come join him in Washington. They weregoing to fly a mission to Europe to look at the economic and the militarysituation in Europe at that time. This is post-war, June of 1948. So on the wayover—he had some blue-ribbon people onboard, civilians as well as militarygenerals. I was the aide to the group, because I had been in the army beforethat briefly, eighteen months, and had been a paratrooper with the 82ndAirborne. He said when he called, “Well, would you like to come back in thearmy?” And I was up at Yale then again. The army split my Yale time. “Oh!No way!” [laughs] “No way I’m going to go back in the army. I’ve hadenough of that.” He said, “No, just for a month, temporary duty, TDY theycall it, to just come over and be the aide to this mission.” So I said sure. It wassummer, you know. I got on the plane with all these big shots, and we landed in London. Theylearned that a few hours earlier the Russians had cut off Berlin, meaning theywouldn’t allow any ground traffic to go in. So my dad got on the phone withthe White House and General Clay at the same time, and they cooked up theairlift, the Berlin Airlift at that very moment. And so in London, we piled onsome symbolic coal, clothes, and food and flew into Tempelhof Airfield inGermany. General Clay came out to meet him, and then they announced theairlift, right then and there. So that was touching history, very big time.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But not enough to get you back interested in the military, I gather.  Draper: No. But we spent two weeks there in Berlin, and I was able to sit in on a lot ofthe staff meetings that General Clay ran. It was a very interesting, excitingtime in Berlin. Then we went down to Greece, where my dad was talking withGeneral [James A.] Van Fleet, who was then fighting the Communists inGreece, leading the Greek Army; we didn’t want the Communists to take overGreece. Then we went up the Adriatic to Trieste, where he met with [JosipBroz] Tito, who had just broken with the Russians, and then we went to Paris.I don’t know what they did, but I was assigned to get perfume. The only realthing I did on the whole trip was to get perfume for all these big shots for theirwives. I had a girlfriend in Paris and went around and got all these fancyperfumes—Joy and Guerlain and—what’s the—Nº Five?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, Chanel. Draper: Chanel Nº Five. I brought them all back to the airplane. The only thing any ofthem had heard of was Chanel Nº Five, so they thought, gosh, I don’t know ifmy wife’s going to think this Guerlain is so great— [<|endoftext|>
Interviewer chuckles] Theydidn’t know any of those names. I was feeling a little bad about the one bigtime assignment I had. See, I was only a second lieutenant. So that was my touching history with my dad. Then he came back to NewYork, and almost as soon as he got back there, he was asked to take over thetrusteeship of the Long Island Railroad by Governor [Thomas E.] Dewey,because they had, just at that time, had two bad accidents, killing a lot ofpeople, and the fear of going on that railroad was great. So my dad loved thechallenges. He was a great guy for taking over a challenge, and he said,without hesitation, he would do it. Now, he and my stepmother had bought—this is the kind of guy he was—theyhad bought a house in Tarrytown, near where the Rockefeller estate is.Tarrytown, New York. When he took this job, he put the house on the marketand moved into a hotel in Garden City, Long Island, in order to travel on theLong Island Railroad. He always traveled in either the front car or the rear car,in order to dissuade others from fearing them, and immediately put someprograms in place to improve the safety systems that they had. He felt heneeded to inspire people that the railroad really was safe.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why did people think of asking him to be in that position? Draper: Why did people think? This was Governor Dewey who makes theappointment of the trustee of the railroad.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, why—  Draper: The railroad was basically broke. It wasn’t making any money. Why did theythink of him? Because he had great creativity in financial matters. He had agood name as somebody who could solve problems. He was a leader; he hadbeen a general. So I think that’s the reason. That’s a good question.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How was he as a father? Draper: He was superb as a father. He was a great inspiration. He had a wonderfulquality of making you respect him and love him at the same time, and he hada cute sense of humor. But he set an example of ethics that was about as goodas anybody could’ve had. An example of that is—I was about five years old,but it’s a good story in the family. We went up to Canada, to Quebec, and wewent fishing. But the key thing was that my mother had seen this greenashtray with the name of the hotel on it, and she thought that would be a nicesouvenir of the trip, and packed it. It was in the hotel room. She told my fatherabout it, about 150 miles down the road, after we had left the hotel. And hesaid, “You what?” [laughs] And he turned right around and drove the car backto return the ashtray to the hotel. They had a fight every so often, I guess, butI’ve never known my mother to be so mad, and him to be so firm. And he wasfirm a lot of times, but he was never so sure of what he was doing. Here wewere, the two sisters and me in the back seat, and he was setting a wonderfulexample right there. He was that kind of guy.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Where are you in age among the siblings? Draper: Youngest. My sisters are living—one in South Carolina, one in NorthCarolina. One married a professor who taught law, and the other one wasmarried to a vice president of US Steel.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: With a father that accomplished, a young person could feel a little intimidated. Draper: True. It didn’t happen to me. He was an inspiration and somebody I loved tospend time with. But you see, all through the thirties, he was working hard ashell to hold onto a job. He had taken a mortgage on a house in Scarsdale, NewYork. Instead of paying the mortgage off when he got a $10,000 bonus in1929, he put the money into a coffee maker that was a new invention. [laughs]He was kind of practicing a little venture capital there.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So he was a risk taker.  Draper: And it didn’t work. No, he wasn’t a very big risk taker, but in that onedecision he was up. But from that point forward, he was very conservativeabout everything. His stocks were mostly conservative utilities. He workedreally hard to hold onto his job when people were being fired right and left inthe investment banking world. He wasn’t around a lot, but he was neverintimidating.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, I can imagine. Draper: So not being around, he wasn’t overwhelming as a father. He worked, I wouldsay, six days a week. I don’t know that he was ever home on Saturday. And heoften worked late in the night. So I didn’t see much of him in those times, andI got used to that. It was not a problem for me, it was just the situation.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, but that must’ve meant that your mother had much more familyresponsibility. Draper: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did she have help? Draper: Yes, we had a maid up until my mother died. We had a maid in the house, thatlived up on the third floor with me. She was in the room next to me. Therewere three floors in the house. That was Bessie. Then my mother got sick withcancer when I was twelve, and we went down to Washington and lived therefor a year. She went to Walter Reed Hospital. Then we came back up and shedied right away. I’m age thirteen, fourteen. So my sister really managed thehouse, my oldest sister, with just the two of us. His mother, my dad’s mother,was in the house for a while, but I don’t know that it was—I think mostly itwas the two of us. So that would’ve been my sophomore, junior year, and thenin my senior year, my younger sister and I moved to an apartment. Dad soldthe house for $10,000. That was it. [chuckling] My dad needed the money.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It was the Depression still, wasn’t it? Draper: Yes, it was the aftermath of the Depression. So all this time is war time, theforties, and we didn’t see him, except when he came back from active duty.When my mother died, he came back, and got reassigned to Washington, andso we were a lot closer at that point. But he left me in school, which was theright thing to do, at Scarsdale High School, That was one of the three bestschools in the country. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is that a public school? Draper: Yes, a very good one.Dad went there originally because they put a lot ofmoney into their school. Scarsdale was a young community, and so theyfocused on making it a good school system. That was a really good move thathe made. He couldn’t have afforded to send us to private school, and to be in aNew York City public school wouldn’t have been so good.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What were you getting interested in as a student? Draper: I was interested in sports. I was always good at math. I was kind of the starstudent in math. Mr. Ross, I can remember, one of the few teachers, he wasvery good with me, and they had a good math department. Then they had avery good English department, and I was not the star in English, by anymeans. So I was mostly interested in sports and my friends. People say, “Oh, too bad you didn’t have any parents around at the time ofyour high school.” Truthfully, that’s a time when I didn’t feel at all bad aboutthat. I could hang out with friends, and no problems at home. One fight mysister and I got into—I don’t know what it was over—I stormed out of thehouse, and she was afraid I was going to run off and go into the war orsomething, sign up for the army, and I was just going up to my friend’s house.So she’s a sweet lady. This is my older sister. She just wouldn’t hurt a flea,but she was pretty good in just keeping things in balance, but she gave mepretty much carte blanche, because there wasn’t much she could to controlme. She was working in New York, commuting in to the city.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: She was a number of years older than you? Draper: She was seven years older.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, because you were still in high school at that point. Draper: That’s right. She was out of college. She went to DePauw University, DePauwCollege, in Indiana.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So it sounds, the way you’re telling it, that losing a mother at a young agedidn’t stop your life. Draper: Not at all. It was terribly sad when it happened. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you close to her? Draper: Yes, yes, very. Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What was she like? Draper: She was elected most popular girl in her class at high school. She was inYonkers, New York. She was fun. She had a sister, who was my aunt, whowas a real character, and the first person to come to San Francisco in thefamily. To us, our mother seemed pretty common, compared to our aunt. Shewas in the fashion business. She worked for Lord and Taylor, and then laterwent to Texas, to Neiman Marcus, and then as a buyer of better dresses—andthen she came here, worked for Cyril Magnin at I. Magnin’s. But she was[imitating his aunt], “Dahling, well, what did you wear, dahling, [laughter] tothe pahty?” She was that kind of gal—a real star. She didn’t marry until late inlife; she didn’t have any children. But we were her children.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you felt close to her, as well? Draper: Very much, yes, yes. Then I really got close to my mother when it was just thetwo of us who went down to Washington, when I was in eighth grade. I wasnew in that class, so I didn’t have a lot of good friends in the class, so she wasmy buddy. We discovered the city together—Washington, D.C. is a fabulousplace to go look at the sites. We went to the FBI and they said—[clickstongue] I still remember—Big, bad Bill is going to—it now will have to beSweet William. I had just been fingerprinted by the FBI, [laughter] at agethirteen. But yes, I remember a lot of good things about our relationship. We werediscovering Washington together, and that was the closest I was to her. I don’tremember a lot of when I was younger, but she was a wonderful mother. Wehad a great family relationship, and that spirit continues today in our wholefamily. Overall, the families in the Draper line have all been pretty close.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, tell me how you ended up at Yale. Draper: The honest truth is, I went to Yale because one of my very closest friends inhigh school—I had four or five that were really close. One, Quentin Smith,was probably the brightest. I said, “Well, where are you going to go?” And hesaid, “Well, my father went to Yale; I’m going to go to Yale.” In those days,[laughs] you just applied to one school. So I said, “Well, I’ll apply to Yale.That sounds good.” My father had said, “You ought to apply to one of the big three.” We didn’t even know about Stanford. It didn’t come up, it wasn’t athought. The West was New Jersey.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: The West was New Jersey. [laughs] Draper: So he said, “You ought to go to one of the three.” I had the impression thatPrinceton was too social, and Harvard was too intellectual, and Yale would bejust about right. So I only applied to the one school. I had gotten a flier fromBucknell, which I liked. I thought that it looked like a good place. It wasfunny. I remember I ran for student body president. At that time, theapplications went out, so I told this school advisor—he was the assistantprincipal, basically. You didn’t have all the specialties at that time. He wastrying to help me sort it out. I said, “I’ll apply to Yale if I get elected; I’llapply to Bucknell if I get defeated.” I got elected, so I applied to Yale.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Very simple. Draper: It was simple in those days. I got an envelope back and I didn’t know whetherit was going to say yes or no, but I didn’t worry about it, somehow. Thingstook care of themselves. You could open it and you think, well, if it’s no, thenI’ll apply somewhere else and probably they’ll let me in— Amazing. Today,ooh! You sweat, your parents sweat, your grandparents sweat, your sisters andbrothers sweat for you, and everybody’s worried, and you send out fifteenapplications and keep your fingers crossed. Draper: They had some kind of a test. I don’t know if they—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Not the SAT? Draper: Yes, I think it was the SAT. It wasn’t that unusual in New York at that time totake tests that were set up by somebody else. Now it’s a big deal that there arethese national tests. But there, it was the New York Regents Test, taken beforethe SAT. The teachers wanted us to do well, and I’m sure they guided us incertain ways. So we were used to that. Then we took the SAT. At that time,they had one general test, and then you could take one of three differentspecial tests. There was a general that carried mostly English and math, andthen you had another test that you took. What the choices were, I’m not sure.But perhaps one was language, and one was history and—I don’t know, I’mnot sure. That’s how I got to Yale. My dad was in the army, and came up with me on the train from Scarsdale toNew Haven, to take me up to Yale to have my interview. They do no interviews today. That was the first time I’d seen Yale. I had already applied.He and I went up to look it over and meet somebody there. I got a goodrecommendation from my principal, who had worked with me as president ofthe student body. I remember years later, seeing his recommendation in theYale file. I later was on the board of Yale trustees, and I don’t know if it wasin that context or what. But I think it was when I was still a kid. Somehow Isaw my own recommendation, and it was very nice. “Billy bore the burden ofleadership.” So that was great.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: At some stage, you took a course from Georges Doriot. Do you remember thatcourse, and was it formative in any way? Draper: Very well, very well. At Harvard Business School. Yes. Georges Doriot wasunique. He gave a course called Manufacturing. Manufacturing had nothing todo with manufacturing, but it was his philosophy of life. In those days, youwent right from college into Harvard. You didn’t have to work for two years.A lot of the students were pretty young and inexperienced, and business wasquite a new thing. So his philosophy was exciting to us. He had a Frenchbackground, and he had been in the U.S. Army, in charge of the quartermastercorps, I think, at one time. Doriot was a very popular professor. He was a veryopinionated guy, who knew exactly what he wanted to tell us. He wanted us tohear what it’s like in real business. So things like, “Don’t stay in Boston.When you graduate, you’ve got to go out and get where men are men, and livein Chicago or Cincinnati or Pittsburgh. Do real things and build big—buildsomething and make a difference. Boston: it’s all too easy.” Then anotherpoint he made: “Keep your antenna up. Always keep your antenna up.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: For new deals, you mean? Draper: Well, not deals. It depends. Whatever business you’re in. You might be in theadvertising business or—yes, for new customers or new ideas or—.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. New anything. Draper: Yes, and he was big on ideas. Well, the first thing he did was unique atHarvard. He grouped four or five people. He just said, “Break up and formteams and form a group of four or five people.” Then you worked togetherwith that group all year. That was a good idea for business, because that’swhat it’s all about, working with other people. So he said, “You’ve got to turnin an idea a week.” By the way, the group also had a main goal of writing athesis, as a group. We picked metalworking, different aspects ofmetalworking; others might’ve picked other things. So you had to turn in anidea a week, other than this thesis, other than taking your tests, and other than listening to him, because he lectured big time. Oh, by the way, Harvard usesthe case system, and it’s not a lecture system. But he lectured. He never wentto the case system. One idea I presented, [laughs] which I still think is a good idea; instead ofbuttons, I thought we could save a lot of time if you just have a snap whichlooks like a button, or whatever you want as an ornament, but just have a littlesnap. And you just go choo-choo-choo [imitating sound of snaps beingfastened]. Everything was timed, too. We all were under the gun to get everything donefast. So we’re thinking, how do we do things faster? Another thing he keptsaying was, “If you wake up in the middle of the night and you think of agreat idea, write it down!” One idea only is selected in the class.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Of all the ideas. Draper: Yes, of all of them.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And how big would a class be? Draper: I would say fifty. So one idea came from our group that got selected. My ideadidn’t get selected. [laughs] That’s just one thing I remember. There wereother ideas we had; I suppose I had some. But one of them that one of myfriends had was to put a light on pens, so that in the middle of the night,[laughter] the light would be there! Another one was a chemical engineer andhe had the idea—Birds Eye Food was brand new then, frozen food. You neverhad frozen food until the fifties. And so he had an idea of putting a spot onthe—some kind of chemical thing he knew would show when a frozen foodmelted. And so if it melted, it meant it wouldn’t be good. So if it melted, thisspot would turn red from green or something like that. Anyway, he got us all thinking about a lot of things. The people that didn’ttake his course, regret it today, because they’ve heard so much about him. Hewas a fabulous guy. I never did do the scrapbook that he said we should all do.But I got a distinction anyway because he didn’t ask for the scrapbooks to beturned in. He always said, “Your wives—,” some of us were married, but nottoo many. Maybe a third of us were. “Those of you with wives, or yourgirlfriend, they should be helpful to you. They should read Business Week,and underline or tear out the articles that are important for you to read. Theyhave to be total partners with you in making you successful.” His whole ideawas you’re going to rise to the top if you keep your antenna up, and you keepdiligent, and you get your wife working on your side. My wife had a job but she didn’t have a career at that time, of course. That was not what was done.There was no career path for women.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How did your wife feel about that? Draper: She laughed. Just like you’re laughing! [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I should’ve asked you, before we got into Harvard Business School, hadyou decided at Yale that business was where you were headed? Draper: I don’t know, it was just a natural, I think. I was shaped a lot by my father,and he was a businessman prior to government service and the military, andhe too knew that Harvard Business School was a good thing to do. At thattime, it was not old. I don’t know how old it was, but it probably was morethan twenty years old at that time. So he encouraged it, and having gone in thearmy, I had my whole way paid by the GI Bill.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because your father was still kind of marginal, in terms of income? Draper: Yes. He made some money, but money was never important to him. Publicservice was his driving force.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now, did you, when you entered Harvard Business School, have an idea ofwhat line of business you might go into? Draper: No. Well, after taking Doriot’s course, I thought I’d better go into heavyindustry. One summer I worked in a steel mill, so that when I got an offerfrom Inland Steel, I went to work for them. I didn’t apply to a lot of places,General Electric wasn’t hiring. When I graduated, was kind of a recessiontime, ’54. So I was glad to get a job, because I had a wife and I had a baby atthat point.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Whom did you marry? Draper: I married a great gal. I was really lucky there. It’s a good story. I met her on aboat going over to Europe. Her name was Phyllis Culbertson, a senior atSmith College travelling with her sister on an American Express tour. I hadbeen in Korea; I fought in Korea as an infantry officer. I came back and wentover to see my dad for the first time in a year, because I’d been in Korea andhe had been in Paris in another job which Truman asked him to do. A big job—manage the Marshall Plan from Paris. [W. Averell] Harriman managed itfrom Washington. So Harriman was the overall director, but my father was theguy on the ground.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: He was the deputy, maybe? Draper: Yes. He was the executive officer, he was roving ambassador. His title wasSpecial Representative of the President, in charge of the Marshall Plan. Hewas the first ambassador to NATO, and he was in charge of Mutual Security[Agency], MSA. He had all three jobs at once.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: My heavens! Draper: And that leads to venture capital, and the first venture capital company here inthe west, because he met [General] Fred [L.] Anderson, who had run the VIIIBomber Command. Harriman suggested Anderson, who had been head of theVIII Bomber Command in London. There was a movie written about himcalled Twelve O’Clock High, I think. It was a very critical time during thewar, bombing Berlin and weakening their willpower, and bombing Dresdenand all those places. So he was sending boys to their death, knowing it; but alot of them came back and it was a great success. Anyway, Fred Anderson was my dad’s deputy in Paris. They didn’t knoweach other, but Averell Harriman said they’d make a good team. Because mydad, he had a very good mind, and he was very good at strategy and makingthings work, creative on solving problems. Anderson was a risk taker and adynamo.The two of them were a great team. So they cooked up the idea to start aventure capital company in California, because Harriman had been here, outin the air base out here, Travis Air Force Base. He came back to Californiaafter they’d served together for a number of years in Paris. My dad went to bechairman of the Mexican Light and Power Company in Mexico City, marriedhis assistant he met in Paris, who was a WAC, army WAC. Not a wacko, aWAC. [laughter] They lived in Mexico for five years, she loved it and heloved it. But Anderson and my dad lined up the idea of starting a venturecapital [firm]. My dad had always thought about venture capital as beingbetter and more fun for me, more interesting, than investment banking, whichhe had done.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But there wasn’t even that term then, was there?  Draper: Yes, there was. In New York City. I had heard the term before. I’ll tell youwho there was there. Are we running a little late?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. Draper: See, when you’re asked to talk about yourself, it’s dangerous. [chuckling] SoAnderson was a terrific guy. That’s a whole other story. But venture capitalwas— I’m trying to think. There’s two. There was American Research andDevelopment in Boston, started by our friend Georges Doriot. There’s a bookcalled The First Venture Capitalist about him. So there’s that. But that wasn’tthe first. I think J.H. Whitney was the first. But that was more family money.The first professional one was in Boston, and then Draper, Gaither &Anderson was the first one in the West.[End Audio File 1]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So we’re talking about the late fifties, aren’t we? Draper: Right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because I have notes here that Draper, Gaither & Anderson was founded in1958. Draper: ’59, I think, it was. There’s an article in Business Week. It’s about January orso of 1960. It’s got a picture of all of us who were there in the startup ofDraper, Gaither & Anderson. It’s got General Anderson, it’s got [H.] RowanGaither, [Jr.], and my dad, and me and [A.] Crawford Cooley, and Don[ald] L.Lucas and the whole group. Pete Bancroft didn’t come until later. He cameafter I left. That’s a different story.But anyway, you asked about the term venture capital. That was not wellknown, but it was known in New York circles. Doriot had started hisAmerican Research and Development in Boston in the mid-fifties, I guess. Hiswas maybe the first professional one with a bunch of unrelated people asinvestors. I think J.H. Whitney was mostly family money. And theRockefellers—there was no Venrock. Now it’s called Venrock. ButRockefeller Brothers did some venture capital. They started Minute Maid andEastern Airlines. Those were venture capital. But Queen Isabella really started venture capital, if you go way back, becauseshe gave Columbus the money and the wherewithal to take a ship out andbring back treasure. And that’s the beginning. Not even the beginning; there’sprobably something way before that. So the concept was there, but theterminology, you’re right, was not known. So my wife would describe to herfriends what I did, and she would describe it as private banking. SiliconValley, of course, was not named Silicon Valley, and we were in a verydifferent time then. It was a small community. Really, San Francisco is prettysmall. It was 750,000. Hasn’t grown much. But around it, it was nothing likethe eight million people living here today. It was orchards out in Sunnyvaleand that was a very different sort of a time.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was Draper, Gaither & Anderson the reason you came west? Draper: Yes. I was working at Inland Steel, and did that for five years, and met[Franklin] Pitch Johnson there.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What were you and he doing? Draper: Well, he was in the mill, foreman in the open hearth. I was, in the first year, ina training program called Randall’s Rangers. Clarence Randall was thechairman of the board at the time. Young guys who had promise were in thegroup, like five or six of us.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You mean being trained for executive positions? Draper: We were being trained for executive positions. So we worked in the mill thefirst year, but went out to different— went up on an ore boat up in LakeMichigan, crawled in a seventeen-inch mine (seventeen inches is the height ofthe coal mine) down in Kentucky that Inland owned. We’d go crawl in and doall the ugly things; but we’d also go to the purchasing department, the salesdepartment, and meet with the chairman of the board. So it was a neat year.Then I picked the sales department to go work for. There were only ninesalesmen. Fascinating. Nine salesmen for— it was the sixth largest steelcompany in the country, and the best managed. But they had the tightest salesdepartment. It was very close. So they didn’t have many levels between thecustomer and the president, because they wanted— they had very goodrelations with their customers. Anyway, I ran South Chicago steel district.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And was your MBA helping you with this?  Draper: Yes, it did, it did. But you know the biggest help? [laughs] HBS taught mehow to draw up a budget. My budget was $400 a month. That was my salary,and that was really tight for me. I had to live within the budget, and so mywife and I, we got our first couches—a couch and chair and some otherfurniture from the Goodwill. I still give the Goodwill checks, because that wasvery helpful to me! [laughs] We worked on the budget. Oh she’s a Smithgraduate and an English major, and when it’s dollars and cents and numbers,she fades. Her eyes glaze over. But she paid a lot of attention to this budgetthat I had learned how to do at Harvard Business School. So I had this yellowfoolscap paper and lines of numbers. We had entertainment: $5. [laughs] Weliterally went out to dinner about once every three months or two months. Wedidn’t do that much. Cathie Johnson, Pitch’s wife, will tell you that whenshe’d come to dinner she’d say, “Phyllis, it must be the end of the month.”[laughs] Because we had noodles or something like that for dinner! [laughter]But it was a very tight budget. We really lived within it. Harvard helped mewith that budget. You have to line it out and you have to parse it out anddecide what’s important. But yes, of course, it helped me in general, becauseit was an overview of how business works. I really knew nothing aboutbusiness when I went to Harvard.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It sounds as though one of the things Doriot was trying to teach you peoplewas what it would be like in the real world of business. Does that imply thatother business courses were more theoretical? Draper: Harvard Business School is built on the case system, and has been ever sinceit [was] founded. The case system is very clearly a story about a company anda problem. You read the story and you have a problem at the end: what shouldSarah do? Then you write the answer to this real case. They were the first, andlots of other business schools use their cases. That’s a big source of theirincome. So other professors would have something—like I took production;how to read a blueprint; how to manage the foreman who has a problem withhis crew and he’s brought it up to you, and you’re the superintendent, and hesaid he’s leaving or Sam is leaving. A lot of personnel kinds of problems. Inproduction, it was a lot of how to produce something, the cost of the product,and how labor is added to the cost. Then you have accounting, too, which istough to teach by case method, but they did it. Then they had marketing, andagain, by case method they’d show you that you could package thisadvertising pitch and—do you cut your advertising budget? Or do yourecognize that half the budget is wasted, but you don’t know which half?[laughs] So therefore, it’s very hard to cut. Another, sales management.Another one was business practices, business policy or something like that. Ifyou had a disgruntled employee walk into your office and you wanted to calmeverything down and you wanted to get him talking, or her talking, the firstthing you want to do is offer them a cigarette. [laughter] <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, was Doriot pulling this all together? Draper: No. Not at all. Doriot was set in his ways, and he was not going to teach bythe case method, he was going to teach by lecture, to tell you how to read theNew York Times in ten minutes. Start with the obituaries, because you’ll seewho has really made something out of their life. You don’t want to be one ofthose me too people down here on a long list. You want to be somebody thatends up with an obituary. [laughs]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So he was always pushing? Draper: Yes! Oh, he was pushing, and telling you to hit your potential and keep yourantenna up and drive forward and always think of your employees. They’re allthere to help you. You want to help them and give them the support they need.He had a lot of good advice, but most of his philosophy is a little bit archaictoday.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, but you’re talking about the fifties, aren’t you? Draper: There were no women in our school. Except those that read and graded thestudent papers submitted by nine o’clock every Saturday night. We had to turnin a paper, the whole class did, on a given case. Of course, it destroyed ourdates, because you work right up to the end. Before we were married in myfirst year, Phyllis, when she was at Smith—came up, and brought a friend whocould type. I couldn’t type. So I had my paper ready by six o’clock, and thefriend had to type for about an hour, and then we could go out to dinner or dosomething with the friend and a blind date I had arranged. But no womenprofessors that I know of, and no women students. No women in theadministration, at any high level.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And Harvard wasn’t exactly fast at getting women undergraduates, either.Seems to me it was well into the sixties, was it not, before it became co-ed? Draper: Sixties or seventies, yes. You asked me one question which I didn’t really geta full answer on. Essentially, how I met my wife.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh right. Draper: I had been in the trenches in Korea during the war. I came back and my oldgirlfriend had written me a Dear John letter, [laughs] that she’d met another guy, who I knew very well. He was a Yalie, he was a friend. So I was lookingaround, but not aggressive. I was just mostly interested in getting on a boatand going over to see my father in Paris. So I signed up with the HollandAmerican Line. You didn’t just fly over to Europe. You go by boat, becauseit’s the cheapest way. Holland American Line was the cheapest way, too. I had been dating a gal in Wellesley earlier. Her friend said, “Look up theCulbertson sisters.” So when I got on the boat, I stood behind these tall girls.They were in a line, which I thought was for food. But turned out it was fordeck chairs. I said, “Are you by chance the Culbertson sisters?” Phyllisdescribes it as they just about dropped, because they thought they didn’t knowa single soul on that boat. They were mostly foreigners. So we, of course, sattogether, because it was deck chairs, for day after day. So I invited her tomarry me the third day after we were out there. [<|endoftext|>
Interviewer laughs] The thing that I didn’t tell you is that she had a ring on at that time, biggerthan the one she’s wearing today, [laughter] from the president of hisfraternity, from Amherst, and all this. She didn’t say yes, but she didn’t sayno. She was a curly headed, dark-haired gal—I’ll show you a picture—andshe was—big smile and very easy to talk to. Well, she thought I should beaiming at her sister, who didn’t have anybody interested—but I wasn’tinterested in her sister, I was interested in her. They were on a trip to goaround Europe, on the American Express tour of Europe. So when I got to Paris, I said to my dad, “I met this gal. I think I really want tomarry her, and so instead of spending the summer here in Paris with you—.”[laughs] I ended up spending two days there and then I went and met them inBrussels or Bruges, followed them to Italy and through Switzerland. It wasmostly women on the trip, so they were happy to have me, and never chargedme a dime for going on the whole trip. Then we came back to France, Paris.On Phyllis’s twenty-first birthday, I took her to a place that my stepmothersuggested, which had all kinds of violins. When one of them, in the john, metme, he said, “Your girl’s birthday? And it’s my birthday. We’ll play for you!”So they come over and play Happy Birthday to her. It was a lovely evening.The only thing is, they kept having glasses of champagne, and the bill wasmuch higher than I expected, so I couldn’t cover it alone. And so I emptiedher wallet. She and I just had enough to cover, with about a one-franc tip. Wehad gotten all different kinds of money around Europe. All the people that hadgreeted us on the way in with a sweep of the hand greeted us on the way outthe same way but the open hand waited for a tip, or so I thought. [laughter] Sowe gave them a Swiss franc and an Italian lira and a this and a that, but wehad nothing for the taxi driver. Her sister was in the hotel somewhere, where Iwasn’t staying; I was staying with my dad. So we went in the taxi, went upand got her sister to pay the taxi. It was too late for me to get the last subway home, and it didn’t go again untilsix the next morning. My father calls about three in the morning saying, “Phyllis—” [laughs] We’re just the three of us, sitting around talking.“Phyllis, is Bill there?” And she, “Oh, yes, he is.” [laughs] And then,[whispers] “It’s your father!” And he said, “You’ve got to get on the boatgoing back home.” We were all going home the next day. “But I can’t gethome, because the subway doesn’t open until six o’clock.” “Well, you’regoing to get—.” So anyway, I did make the boat and went back home with mysister, who had been over there in Paris all summer. The four of us got alongvery well, and her sister, five of us. About October, Phyllis hadn’t made up her mind yet and was still wearing thering. [laughs] And I go down and have a date with her. So I finally said, “Hey,listen.” She remembers this to this day, because the term I used was exactlywhat caught her. I said, “Hey, listen, make up your mind. There are a lot offish in the sea.” She remembers “There are a lot of fish in the sea.” [laughs]So she returned her engagement ring pretty soon after, married me a weekafter graduating from Smith and we’ve been married for fifty-five years.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That’s quite a story. Draper: Yes. Three kids. Happy family.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: We started on Draper, Gaither & Anderson. Why don’t we finish that episode.You talked about Anderson, but who is Gaither? Draper: He was very special. A real super star. The lynchpin of the firm. He was theyoungest of the three. There were three senior partners, and then there werefive young men like myself, who were going to learn the trade, I guess. Well,we were all learning it in a way. Gaither had been head of the FordFoundation; chairman of the board of the Rand Corporation; a lawyer whowas the managing partner of Cooley Crowley Gaither, here in San Francisco,best law firm, did our law work; and wrote the Gaither Report for Kennedy,which was about the missiles, and the fact there were no missiles. He was awonderful guy. He did all those things, started Draper, Gaither & Anderson,came down with cancer, died at the age of fifty, after doing all those things.His son is now a partner of Sutter Hill. Full circle—helped do some of thelegal work for Sutter Hill, had graduated from Princeton and then StanfordLaw School, became chairman of the board of Stanford. He lived on to dosome of the things that his dad didn’t. Well, it’s just a great story.So here were three powerhouse guys starting Draper, Gaither & Anderson.They needed five young guys. Anderson having done a few privateinvestments—let’s see, we called them—special situations. That’s what it wascalled, special situations. He would make some investments in special situations with a guy named Larry Duerig, who had gotten an investmentbanking background here in San Francisco with a small firm.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, so this was on the West Coast. Draper: Yes, this is all West Coast now. Yes, it started right here. Palo Alto. So thethree senior partners, and then Larry Duerig was kind of an in-between. Heknew a lot about the investment business and so on. And then these fiveyoung guys—Don Lucas was twenty-nine years old and had been in theinvestment business in New York. Crawford Cooley—it was Cooley CrowleyGaither. So he was the son of the lawyer named Cooley. Crawford had beenworking with an inventor who was in on the original color television. But hewasn’t a scientist himself—Crawford was just Crawford. [chuckles] And thenthree other guys. We started in a small place in Palo Alto, and then builtsomething on the Stanford campus, with a ninety-nine year lease.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was there Stanford Industrial Park at that point? Draper: Well, in a way there was, because Hewlett-Packard was on it and Varian wason it. Yes, so in a way there was Stanford Park. But the idea of the ninety-nineyear lease was pretty new, and we signed one of the early ones. That wasbrilliant business management of Stanford since the Leland Stanford giftdisallowed any sale of Stanford land which was truly brilliant..<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why that area as opposed, for example, to San Francisco? Draper: Because of Stanford.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, and spawning little companies. Draper: Yes. So Dave Packard and Bill Hewlett were brought together by Stanford,and the Varian brothers, and it was spreading a little more and so—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So was the firm looking at high-tech investment? Draper: The firm was looking at high tech only, yes. Matter of fact, I’ll give you alittle story on that. I went off to Hawaii, because a guy named Chinn Howanted to build an apartment called a condominium. It was a brand new term.Only one other condominium in the world was down in Arizona somewhere.You had to get your head around the fact that somebody would buy some 20space. They didn’t get the ground, they owned a space. They were smallapartments, 500 square feet, in something called the Ilikai on Waikiki Beach.So I, as a young guy, was happy to go and look at this and thought it was darngood. Lowell [S.] Dillingham was a big name. He and I sat and had mai taisone evening on the beach, and I was feeling no pain. But I literally fell in lovewith this project of Chinn Ho’s—went up to see the architect up in Seattle,who built the [Space] Needle, the famous Needle. Same architect for theIlikai, which is in three parts. It was like a Y. I just saw it on paper and a littlemodel that Chinn Ho, the promoter, was putting together. Anyway, I cameback, thought this is the greatest thing, we’ve got to do this deal. TheRockefellers were one of the three key limited partners, and the limitedpartnership was set up just like they are today. It was really the first of its kindwhere it was a general partnership with limited partners, where the generalpartners got 20 percent of the carry and got a fee to manage, like 1.5 percentfor the management costs.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, now, was that a new arrangement then? Draper: Yes. That was new.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did Draper— Draper: I think it was the first one. Cooley Crowley Gaither, the law firm, created that.So they’re all the same now. You can do the same, almost identical.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And do you think that Cooley, et cetera, invented that way of managing aventure? Draper: Of the legal agreement. No, I can’t answer that. I think there were generalpartners and limited partners in other parts of the country. But certainly, it wasnew out here, and it was obviously a very good way for general partners to getpart of the action and still get taxed by capital gains, and not ordinary income.Not being paid a salary. Or not even a bonus. You had a stake in the successof the enterprise. But just to complete the story. So I get a call to go see the Rockefellers inNew York, the senior partner of the Rockefellers. He was an impressive guy,also a Yalie, so I thought, we’ll get along fine. He was mad as hell. I’m sittingthere, a young associate. And I’m just saying what a great deal the Ilikai is.And he said, “We can do real estate deals. You’re there to do technology!Why in hell are you looking at building a condominium?” I didn’t know atthat time—he probably did know—they hadn’t yet done the Mauna Kea. Haveyou ever been to Hawaii, the Mauna Kea? <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. Draper: They did that very early on, and several brothers were going to have a bigstake in Hawaii later on. So I said, “I don’t know, I just think this is a verygood deal. But if you guys don’t like it—.” Limited partners can’t touch themoney once they’ve signed up for a general partnership. So technically, wehad every right to do anything, because there were no restrictions saying wehad to do technology deals. DGA was to go into the venture capital business.Venture capital could be investing in a condominium on Waikiki Beach.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So there was no specialization, as there tends to be today. Draper: No, it was very general. So just looking for special situations, that was what itwas called. So I said, “Well, whatever.” Nobody wanted to touch the deal ifthe Rockefellers, one of the three big partners, limited partners—two millioncame from them, two million came from Lazard Frères, and two million fromone of General Anderson’s friends in New York. I think it’s probablymentioned in Business[Week] article. I’d say it’s in January or February of1960.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Around this time, Henry J. Kaiser is seeing the development potential ofWaikiki, right? Draper: Yes. I went over on one of the first jets. So the jet airplane is what broughtHawaii together. They hadn’t yet developed the outer islands; it was all onOahu.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: When is this condominium deal? Draper: 1960. Or ’59. Probably ’59.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, the firm, by my notes, was founded in 1958. Yes. Draper: I think we moved out here in ’59. I was there before my father by a fewweeks.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you were there as an associate at the very beginning. Draper: I think it was September of ’59, yes. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It was your father that was the attractant, wasn’t it? You were still a relativelyyoung man— Draper: Oh, yes. Oh, I knew nothing about anything.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was the whole Hawaiian tourism business an obvious thing? Or were youearly in the game in recognizing the potential there? Draper: Oh, no, I think Chinn Ho heard there was money coming together in PaloAlto. We got good publicity on this brand new venture capital company. Ithink he looked us up through a friend or something. I was just doing the—due diligence is the common word today. We didn’t have that word then, butthat was what I was doing. I was doing the due diligence.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So maybe it was Chinn that was the visionary. Draper: Oh, yes, I think he was. He was a real estate developer. But it was happening.Lowell Dillingham knew that it was happening. They built a shopping center,the first one in Hawaii, which they took me out to see. No, there was no oneperson that envisioned what was going to happen in Hawaii. The jet airplane!But they all knew. People who lived there knew this was big and that thingswere going to develop. It was owned by five families, basically.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Should we stop here? Draper: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I thank you. And we’ll continue this very interesting story. Draper: Yes, yes![End of Interview] <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: In this second session, we’re up to the next step in your very long career,which is the Draper and Johnson Investment Company. Last time you told methat Pitch Johnson was a Yale classmate. Draper: No. He was Harvard Business School. And not a classmate. We startedtogether, but then I got called back into the Korean War. I started in the classof 1952 and finished in the class of 1954. And he was in the class of ’52.We’re the same age. He came out of Stanford University, and then wentstraight to Harvard, and I did, too, from Yale.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How did the re-association with Pitch Johnson occur? Draper: Well, I didn’t know him at Harvard.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, I didn’t realize that. Draper: There were 800 people in the class, and I didn’t meet him. I met him for thefirst time at Inland Steel, in East Chicago, Indiana, where he was working inthe mill, and I was in Clarence Randall’s Ranger Program, they called it, atraining program for about five or six of us, to go around to all the differentparts of the steel company. I ended up a year later, after the training program,I went into sales. But we started out in the mill, and that’s how I met him. His wife and my wifebecame best friends, and he and I became best friends. Our kids grew uptogether. We came to Inland with one baby girl, and he didn’t have anychildren at the time. He had his first baby there, and we had our second childthere. East Chicago is a mill town on Lake Michigan, near Chicago, but it’s inIndiana. Inland Steel was the sixth largest steel company in the country butprobably the best managed. It was very good. The Block family really owneda large share of the stock. It was publicly traded stock. And so Pitch and I metthat way. So then when I came out west to join my father five years later, I was going tohis hometown. Pitch was born in Palo Alto, California, and our offices,Draper, Gaither & Anderson, was setting up in Palo Alto, and eventuallyended up on the Stanford campus, in a lease there, a ninety-nine year lease. Ithink it was the first ninety-nine year lease that Stanford gave.  And so when I decided to start my own company, left three years after beingwith Draper, Gaither & Anderson, it wasn’t too hard a decision to call Pitchand ask if he wanted to be a partner, because he was an engineer, I wasn’t. Iwas an economics and history and political science kind of a major at Yale.Divisional major, they called it. So he was going to be a great partner, and Iwas delighted to give him the call. He took like a minute and a half to decidethat he wanted to come back to Palo Alto and join me. If you live throughthose Chicago winters and in a steel mill—Palo Alto sounded pretty good tohim, I think. The idea of venture capital sounded good. I went out to Chicagoto meet with him, and then later we designed the plan for the company on mydining room table, or kitchen table, I think, in my house in Palo Alto.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How would he have known of venture capital? Draper: He didn’t. I told him what it was about, and so he learned it with me. Iwouldn’t have known [laughs] anything about it either, except for those threeyears at Draper, Gaither & Anderson.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why did you leave Draper, Gaither & Anderson? Draper: I left because I really wanted to do my own thing.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How did your father feel about that? Draper: Great. He was delighted. He was worried, of course, and thinking it’s a riskybusiness. But he loaned me $50,000, and Pitch’s father-in-law, who waspresident of Standard Oil of New Jersey, loaned him $50,000. We each had$25,000, and so we put $75,000 each into the business, so there was $150,000. We started a small business investment company, so called, SBIC. Thegovernment gave us license number twelve. We were the twelfth one to start. Ihad learned about the program from a friend of mine at Inland Steel, as amatter of fact, who sent me the description of this new SBIC program underEisenhower. It was Eisenhower’s idea, I think, for government to help smallbusinesses get going with more venture capital. It leveraged our money. Weput in the $150,000. They agreed to lend us $300,000. The loan was a ten-yearloan, at 5 percent interest. So that seemed like a good deal, and it helped usget going. We made, I don’t know, maybe ten or fifteen investments, and then after threeyears we merged with a real estate company named Sutter Hill. It was a realestate development company for developing shopping centers, but it was a small company, too, and they got an SBIC license also and were just startingto go into venture capital. We’d had about three years’ experience. They hired a guy named Paul [M.] Wythes, who was a classmate of thepresident of Sutter Hill land company, called Sutter Hill, Limited, I think. Sothen Paul became vice president of the SBIC, and I became president. Wewere a little early in venture capital, to be honest with you. Pitch had an offerto become a consultant or some operating job in Air Products, over inOakland, I think it was, and so he went and did that. We built up Sutter Hill, Paul and I. Then a few years later, we paid back thegovernment and we started a new limited partnership called Sutter HillVentures; the other was Sutter Hill Capital Company. Sutter Hill Ventureswas in the tradition of—well, it was the same format as the Draper, Gaither &Anderson, a limited partnership, where we got one company, Genstar, a bigCanadian company with a lot of assets in Canada, and they were the onlylimited partner. We were the general partners, Paul and I, and then we addedtwo more, shortly after making the deal with Genstar.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You said that you were a bit early in venture capital. What were youthinking— Draper: Yes, Pitch thought he would go back to the operating world, and that he wouldgo into more of an operating role. I think that was what was going on in hismind. So we made a couple of good investments. One was Electroglas, [Inc.]that made a diffusion furnace. And we got a fellow who operated a boatcompany, a fellow named Chuck [Charles W.] Gravelle. Chuck had been inMinnesota, and he had been hired by this fellow who owned a boat company.Chuck was brought on to do his marketing. He had a budget of $25,000 forthe year, and he blew it all on one ad in the Life magazine. It was a brilliantmove because the ad said, “If you want to become a dealer for this boatcompany,” and it had a picture of the boat, “send in enough to buy one boat.”Well, they were overwhelmed by the orders, and so he became rich, inMinnesota terms, in this small town in Minnesota. So he and his wife felt alittle uncomfortable. In a small town, it’s difficult to be too wealthy, or youhave too much focus. So they wanted to get out and they came to California.So we said, “Well, why don’t you run this company, Electroglas? Because theguy we’ve got is Arthur Lash. I think he came out of Fairchild, which madesemiconductors. He was an engineer and not a CEO. So you always need tohave somebody that’s running the company, and you need somebody with thetechnology, and we had the two of them together. It worked out. ChuckGravelle didn’t know anything about technology, but he was a darn goodmarketing, sales, organized person, and the company was very successful.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Had you perceived that?  Draper: Well, I knew in my experience at Draper, Gaither & Anderson that having theright management team is essential.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right. But you looked at this guy and you saw that he had potential in thatregard? Draper: Yes. Sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Sutter Hill, I read, is called the first venture capital company on the WestCoast. Draper: No, Draper, Gaither & Anderson is. It went Draper, Gaither & Anderson;Draper and Johnson; Sutter Hill. And as I say, Sutter Hill had just gotten anSBIC in about 1965, ’64 or something. So they were just starting, and theyhired Paul Wythes to do that and maybe made an investment or two. But thereal sequence was Draper, Gaither & Anderson; Draper and Johnson; SutterHill.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And the connection between Draper and Johnson and Sutter Hill Capital wasmore the SBIC than the fact that Sutter Hill Capital was a real estatecompany? Draper: No, the real estate company did not end up succeeding, in the long run. Theydid okay for five years or something. They ended up getting squeezed whenthe interest rates ran way up. President Carter was president. It squeezed themand they went out of business. But the venture capital business flourished, andit was one of the most successful in the early days, as it is today. Then severalothers started in the valley. Kleiner Perkins. In Tom Perkins’s book,autobiography, called the Valley Boy[:The Education of Tom Perkins]—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, I’ve read it. Draper: —he gives me credit for bringing him the first good deal they had. They had acouple of bad deals in Kleiner Perkins, but I brought him a company calledQume that we invested in, and they came in too, and that was a whole otherstory. That was a great story about a Chinese American that I can tell you.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, we can go into that later.  Draper: Whenever you want.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But I’m interested in this very early stage, when venture capital wasn’t even aterm. According to what I’ve read, the term was not coined till 1971. Draper: I think you told me that once before. But that’s not true, because I knew theterm venture capital when I was at Inland Steel in the fifties. You see, itstarted in New York, with J.H. Whitney, probably in the late forties, theconcept of venture capital, and the term was beginning to get coined. When,exactly, I don’t know, but I know clearly that it was a pretty well-known termon the East Coast. And then General Doriot is credited with starting the firstventure capital company in Boston, and that started well before Draper,Gaither & Anderson. Draper, Gaither & Anderson in 1958 or ’59. I thinkAmerican Research and Development, which was Doriot’s, was maybe midfifties, something like that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, and I read a short interview with Benno [C.] Schmidt, [Sr.] who ofcourse, was working with Jock Whitney, and he claims that he started theterm. And I believe that was the late fifties, or maybe even the forties. Soyou’re absolutely right. Draper: So when we got out here, the term wasn’t known. You’re right. It wasn’tknown in the West at all. The term wasn’t used and my wife was describingwhat I did as private banking.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] Did Draper, Gaither & Anderson use that term? Draper: Oh, sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: They thought of themselves as venture capitalists. Draper: Definitely. We knew at the time we were the first venture capital company inthe West. But we were maybe the third in the country. The Rockefellers wasreally family money. I would say they were doing venture capital with familymoney, but it wasn’t what has become a traditional venture capital company,with professionals. Doriot really had that and Jock Whitney and Benno.Benno’s father is the one that was the partner, also named Benno. Benno [C.Schmidt, Jr.] became president of Yale, and as a matter of fact, I went on theboard of trustees at the time he was president of Yale. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: In my mind, a venture capitalist is associated with high technology. But was itperhaps any business that had potential? Or were you thinking high tech? Draper: High tech. Yes, but it wasn’t called high tech, it was technology. It was peoplewith a new idea. It was often called special situations. General Anderson,when he talked about our investments, he’d talk about special situations.Venture capital became more and more the common term as we progressed.Did you get that Business Week article?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. Draper: I think it’ll say venture capital in that right there.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, it does. Draper: So we were totally focused on technology. In fact, I went over— Chinn Hohad approached Anderson, and he sent me over to Hawaii to look at acondominium. Didn’t I tell you that story?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. Draper: So I got called on the carpet by the Rockefellers. “Hey, you’re there to backtechnology companies, not real estate.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you had your hand slapped.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Tell me a little bit more about the SBIC. I read that one reason that Genstarwas brought into the picture was because the SBIC had a financial limit; thatyou could only have a fund of a certain size. Draper: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You just simply wanted more money to work with? Draper: Yes. We wanted more money to work with. We had a big name and we had asmall pocket book. [laughs] That’s the essence of it. And so because we werethe only ones in the valley to go to—these young companies couldn’t go to the bank to borrow the money, so we were the new kid on the block, newinstitution on the block, to do venture capital. So skipping ahead to Sutter Hill, we went to Genstar to get significant capital.Significant in those days was $10 million. We got $10 million from Genstar.It was a big company that managed cement and housing and tugboats on bothcoasts. It was a big Canadian company. But this was kind of an out-of-theordinary thing, to invest in venture capital. But the young president of it likedthe idea. I had heard about it from a classmate of mine, Charlie Mayer, whohad worked at Société Générale de Belgique which owned Genstar. And so I met with the chairman of the board of Société and said, “We needmore money, and Charlie had suggested you might be interested in investingin technology.” Because Charlie had come out to stay with me and my wife,just on a personal visit, and he said, “If you ever need more money, we’re inthe market to get into more technology.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that a very forward-looking idea for a big corporation at that time? Draper: Yes. Well, I’ll explain. It made a big difference in their situation, because theyhad this kind of earnings—very choppy and kind of flat, but growing. Not flat,but it was very cyclical, and not the kind of growth that technology companiescan provide— and I will say that with quotes, because technology servicesand products can be worthless, too, if not properly commercialized. So I was told by the chairman of Société Générale de Belgique that they do alltheir North American investments through Genstar, so talk to the president ofGenstar. So I went up to Montreal and met with the young president there,Angus [A.] MacNaughton—who, by the way, lives in the Bay Area, if youever want to interview him. Angus came out to visit us and look at our variousmillion of it. The investment, on the day it was announced, made the frontpage of the Wall Street Journal. So a $10 million investment was a big deal inthose days—something on the order of 1969, I guess, something like that.Maybe earlier than that. No, I think it was 1969. Except for the first three years, which were flat—there was kind of a recessionthat occurred in the early seventies, and we were all flat in our evaluations.But Genstar, with their $6 million investment, according to AngusMacNaughton—you can check the exact figure, but I think he said that theymade three-quarters of a billion dollars out of it. Three-quarters of a billiondollars on a $6 million investment.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That’s amazing. 30 Draper: The reason it was great for that company is it received these “bluebirds,” callthem. The good investments that we would pass out as we got them, would fillin their earnings, so they looked like a growth company. Yet they were onlyreally a cement company and a housing company. And then they got takenover by, I think, British Tobacco. They did a leveraged buyout or some kindof a buyout of that company. The new investor in Genstar didn’t want venturecapital; they just wanted the basic industry. So they made a big mistake. Andso MIT, Yale, Princeton, and [short pause] Stanford—I guess it was Stanford.Yale, Princeton, MIT, at least those three took over. I don’t know whenStanford came in, maybe a little later. But they took the whole position. Andit’s one of the best investments. Sutter Hill is still in Yale’s portfolio. Yale hasthe best record of all the universities in the country for endowment.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right, I’ve read that. Draper: And part of that is because of venture capital; part of it is because they payattention and Sutter Hill continues to have something like a 35 to 40 percentIRR.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Impressive. Draper: Meaning return on investment.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What control did Genstar put on Sutter Hill? Draper: Good question. We were right down here, across the street over here at theAlcoa Building. It used to be called the Alcoa Building. And we were atCooley Crowley Gaither’s office, [with] our lawyer. Angus MacNaughtonwas out here to sign the $10 million check and the agreement. We had theagreement all done, but he said, “I think we need some form of check on yourinvestment. Call it like a veto opportunity.” So we said, “Well, let us caucus.”So he went out of the room. And I talked to this wonderful old guy, EdHuddleson, who was a wonderful senior partner at Cooley. He did all theDraper, Gaither & Anderson legal work, and he did mine in Sutter Hill. Andhe said, “I think you ought to tell him—” And he talked this way. [imitatingHuddleson] “I think, Bill, you ought to just tell him that maybe he’s not readyfor venture capital.” So we called Angus back in. Angus was a year or twoyounger than I am. Still is. [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It usually works that way!  Draper: Yes. Usually does. So Angus came in and I said, “Angus, maybe you’re justnot ready for venture capital.” “Oh, no, no, no.” [laughs] So all of a sudden,the cards turned and he signed it. Although when he signed the agreement, hissignature—his name is MacNaughton; you’d think you’d see some Ms andCs. All you see is this big circular thing. It’s just a bunch of zeroes inside it.And so I said, “Wait a minute, is that your signature?” And it is, to this day,the same signature. Anyway, I walked away with a $10 million check in my hands [laughs] outhere. It was one of the most exciting days of my life. With Paul Wythes—thetwo of us walked over to the bank and had—[laughs] $10 million. That was inthe Wall Street Journal the next day. So that was the start of really significantinvestments and money. We hired two young guys, Len [G. Leonard] Baker,Jr. and Dave [David L.] Anderson. One MIT, Dave, and—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right away you did this? Draper: Well, within six months.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes—because you had some money now. Draper: Within six months or a year. Yes, we needed to strengthen our staff, as well asadding to the money.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you thinking of any particular sector for investment? Draper: Not really. But the semiconductor set off a whole chain of new products—andtransistor before that. And so then things came along. So when I was atDraper, Gaither & Anderson, I put money in something called CorbinFarnsworth. A guy named Elliott Farnsworth started the first defibrillatorcompany in the world. The first. And it’s still in business. They were sold toMedtronic. But things were beginning to happen here in Silicon Valley. We ended upbacking LSI Logic, which became a big semiconductor company. I made aspeech down in Los Angeles to some convention that was interested inventure capital. And at the end of it, a guy named Wilf [Wilfred J.] Corrigancame up to me and said, “I want to start a new company.” And so we backedhim, but it was more money than Sutter Hill wanted to put in. So KleinerPerkins was in business at that point, and so was Mayfield [Fund]. And I’mnot sure whether Mayfield invested, I think Kleiner did. I know they did. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that a new idea? Draper: The semiconductor? Well, he had worked at Fairchild, and he was startingout— Oh, you mean sharing the—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I mean the syndicating, yes. Draper: I think that was pretty new. And we were beginning to form like a little club,where we trusted each other. Another startup company we all backed togetherwas Hybritech, which probably saved my life.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What do you mean by that? Draper: It was a big financial win. But more important, it came up with the test forprostate cancer, the PSA test. And that was also backed by Kleiner and byothers. That was down in San Diego. So we worked together a good bit.Today, the venture capital industry is a little less friendly. It’s morecompetitive, because the funds have gotten so big they want to put a lot ofmoney out. In our case, we were small and we needed to shore it up in orderto get the wherewithal to give Wilf Corrigan enough to start up LSI Logic orBill Poduska enough for Apollo Computer, etc.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, does Draper Richards tend to syndicate? Draper: We do, yes. We tend to, because we’re even smaller. I don’t have any outsidelimited partners, so all the money is mine and Robin Richards’s. And sowe’ve got about forty companies, but we couldn’t finance all those ourselves,so yes. But we do the startup phase and we do some follow-on. We put inmaybe a million dollars in the first round and end up with two million in thecompany or something. In those cases, we would have about the samenumbers, as a matter of fact. But of course, times were different, and itbought—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Went much further. Draper: Went much further.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: When you were syndicating through Sutter Hill, did you usually insist onbeing the lead investor?  Draper: Oh, yes, I would say. But we didn’t talk too much about lead investor. Yes,we would round up the money. We’d call Kleiner and Mayfield, “Do youwant to come in and share the deal and look at it?” And yes, we’ll all go in. Sowe didn’t talk about our being a lead and you do it my way. And in fact, itwasn’t much of a term sheet. The term sheet often was just a [laughs] handwritten thing. We would often just have the terms laid out on a piece of yellowpaper, and then call Cooley and say draw up the agreement.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, tell me what would be on that piece of yellow paper. Draper: Oh, the amount of money that we were going to put in, the price per share thatwe’d pay, the number of extra options that would be available to newmanagement and options available to the current management. Sometimeswe’d make a loan and an equity investment together. Or sometimes it wouldbe a convertible loan for the whole thing. I don’t think we used preferredstock as much as we do today. Well, each one was a little different. I’ll give you an example. Three peoplecame into my office and wanted to start up a company called Activision,which was a game company.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now, this is Sutter Hill? Draper: Yes. I got a fourth to manage it, because the three of them, all they wanted todo was design games. I asked one of them, “Well, what do you want to do inthe long term in your life?” “All I want to do the rest of my life is to makegames!” And he meant it. [<|endoftext|>
Interviewer laughs] And for all I know, he’s still doingit. There was a company called Atari.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, I remember. Draper: And Atari had the control sticks on a television set, and they had the gamecalled Pong. And you’d go bing-bing-bing-bing, back and forth. So we usedthe Atari setup and made games for them. Not for them, but for anybody thatowned an Atari. Basically, it was like an early computer, in a way. Controlmechanisms. And so I got one guy—Jim Levy—I think he’d been with TimeWarner. Anyway, he came out and wanted a job to run a company. And so Isaid, “Why don’t you meet with these guys?” I said, “Well, how much are youable to put in?” Well, of course, they were able to put in, let’s call it $10,000each. Or nothing. Or something. Well, I said, “Look, why don’t we do it thisway? You put in $30,000, $10,[000] each.” And Jim Levy was going to put ina little more, because he could. So you ended up with $50,000. “We’ll put up $50,000 as stock, and we’ll go fifty-fifty on the company. We’ll each own a50 percent ownership.” But the company needs, call it $500,000, so we’ll putin the other $450,000 on a long-term note. And that’s the kind of thing. Or thenote might be convertible to another 10 percent of the company or something.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now, was that new, that idea? Draper: I used that a little more than it’s used today, and it was relatively new butnothing is new under the sun. Remember Queen Isabella was the first venturecapitalist.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. There’s always a precedent. Draper: But yes, I would say it was a good way to put everybody on the same terms.They’ve got a little skin in the game, a little of their own money, and they owna little more of the company than they could if we put all the money in. Theyknew that, and it kind of leveraged their position. So in those days, thereweren’t many of us, and there were more opportunities in relation to today,where today there is a lot of money and not that many good new ideas.Although there’s still a lot. So I tend to agree that more money creates more ideas. But the proportion haschanged, so that an entrepreneur that came in today would say, “We want togive up only 30 percent of the company for the $500,[000]. ” Except now it’dbe for $5 million. So there’s a little bit of difference there. The entrepreneur isin a stronger bargaining position than he was. However, in those days, hemade a lot of money, we made a lot of money. We were more on the sameside than they are today, I think. I just had a good feeling about those days.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I think this is a critical juncture that we’re talking about, beginning withDraper, Gaither & Anderson and going on through Sutter Hill. But it makesme wonder. An entrepreneur with a good idea, before there was Draper,Gaither or any of these other early companies, what did he do? Where did hiscapital come from? Draper: Sometimes it would be family money. There was a family that owned—and Ithink it was called Sequoia Wire [and Cable Company]. A guy named Paul[M.] Cook worked for them, and that money came from a family. Then PaulCook left and started Raychem, which General Anderson had financed. ButRaychem was really a big hit here. It was shrinkable tubing on wire, so thatyou could put a loose plastic around wire and then warm it, heat it. [imitatingsound of plastic shrinking] Sh-sh-sh-sh, and it shrinks up, grabs that cabletight. It was a great idea, and it’s a big company still today. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And that’s an insulation device? Draper: Yes. So my point in saying that is, I think that original—not Raychem,because that was started because the venture capital came from Anderson. ButSequoia Wine, the original company, I think, was family money. So if youdidn’t have some family that just said, “Well, here, take a chance.” My dad, in1929, before the crash, had the opportunity. He got a bonus from Dillon,Read, his investment banking firm that he worked [for], was a partner in—gota nice bonus at Christmastime. Things were all good in 1929, everything wassailing high. So he got an opportunity to put this bonus to work as either paying off themortgage that he had on our house in Scarsdale, New York, or to invest in acoffee machine that came out of Germany, I think. He invested in the coffeemachine, which of course went bankrupt, and had to work like hell all throughthe Depression. He just barely held on, in order to pay our mortgage. So thatwas a way that people got money. An entrepreneur would go to others, let’ssay investment bankers, or a commercial banker, or some rich individual, andtry to get support. So I think that was the way it went. Very informally, veryad hoc.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were the East Coast sources, such as the Whitneys and the other rich families,were they— Draper: They were available, but they were very small.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: They were investing in the West? Draper: No, not that I know of. No.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So what does this mean for innovation in what we call Silicon Valley, havingnow what is, for the West anyway, a pretty new source of money for youngcompanies with bright ideas? It seems to me a big change. Draper: That’s right. But are you saying what does it mean now?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: No, I mean what did it mean then. Draper: I think it meant eureka! [<|endoftext|>
Interviewer laughs] It meant my God! There’s an enginefor the growth, for the potential, for the innovation. Varian brothers was coming out with the first MRI, magnetic resonance. Nobody knew what thepotential was, but of course, it turned into something everybody has to havewhen your knees begin to creak. I saw the first laser here. As I told you, westarted up the first defibrillator company. And of course, now, where one formof technology talks to another, the acceleration is enormous. So the next tenyears, twenty, thirty years, you’re going to see dramatic growth in all kinds ofscientific breakthroughs. A lot around health, and you know about that, and alot around public transportation, probably in communications.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: If I’m catching you right, you’re saying that it’s more than just the fact thatthere’s a big pool of money. It’s the fact that one technology, one businessplays upon another. Draper: That’s exactly right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And builds in an exponential way? Draper: Yes, that’s right. That’s exactly right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is that a well known idea? Draper: I don’t know. I’m sure it’s not original, but it’s true. It’s clear, as you can see.The computer itself made things possible that just were not possible before.And so that computer is able to do mathematical computations so rapidly thatthe human brain couldn’t keep up. It would have taken an army to do itlonghand. Then when that started to happen, then it could be applied to certaintechnical problems that gave other breakthroughs. You know what? The timemachine—seems a little crazy, that you can go backwards and forwards intime. But when you grasp a very simple thought that if we can make amachine that can go faster than light, and then we can make a door and climbinto that machine, we can go with it, faster than light, and we can go forwardand backward into time.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is there anybody working on that? Draper: Stephen Hawking is the guy—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh! [laughs]  Draper: —that gave me that thought. He gave a lecture that Intel produced out here,and he gave a lecture with his two fingers. The most captivating lecture I’veever attended, and that was one of the parts of it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Really? Well, we diverted from Sutter Hill. You mentioned Paul Wythes—were you meeting him for the first time in Sutter Hill? Why Paul Wythes? Draper: He was a very close friend of Greg [Gregor C.] Peterson’s. Greg Peterson andhis brother-in-law started Sutter Hill real estate company. Greg was in thesame class as Paul. I’m not actually sure what Paul did straight out of businessschool.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Paul went to Princeton, didn’t he? Draper: Yes, went to Princeton and Stanford Business School, and they wereclassmates at Stanford Business School. Greg hired Paul before I knew him,and then Pitch and I talked to Frank Lodato. I knew Frank better than Greg,but I knew them both. Their company was very small. They had a secretary;we didn’t [laughs] have a secretary. They had a Xerox machine and we didn’t.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [laughs] It got down to that level? Draper: Yes, almost like that. So we put our two companies together. Oh, but theimportant thing was, they wanted to go into venture capital, beside the realestate. So Greg found out about the SBIC program and got a license, and hehired Paul to help him with the SBIC. They made one or two deals before wecame together with them, but they were pretty inexperienced. I had had threeyears of venture capital.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you knew a little more. Draper: And three more years with Pitch. So yes, I knew a lot more. We had doneprobably a dozen deals in Draper and Johnson. So I became president. Paul’sa little younger, five years younger. I became president, he was vice presidentof the SBIC, and that’s how it all fit. And then he and I conceived of SutterHill Ventures, to make it a partnership, raise more money—paid off the SBIC,paid off the government, sold the SBIC to Genstar in the package, in thetransaction, so that Genstar bought it for fair value. They got a good dealthere, too. So they, in a sense, closed up the SBIC, and we just had thepartnership money. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. But it seems to me from what you’ve been saying that the SBIC, eventhough it had its limitations—and there may have been others, other than thefinancial limit that we talked about—got people thinking in this way. Draper: It got us into business. Well, Pitch wouldn’t have come into it, because hewouldn’t have known about it; he was in the steel business. But it got me,with $25,000 to my name, into the business, because we got $300,000together.[End Audio File 3]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I believe you were going to make a comment about the place of the SBIC inthe history of venture capital. Draper: Yes. Eisenhower had the administration that came up with the idea of a smallbusiness investment company. And I think it was the [Small BusinessInvestment Company] Act of 1958.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You’re right. Draper: It was a bonanza for me, in that I never would’ve gotten into venture capital.Pitch Johnson wouldn’t have either, because I brought him into it. There areother people who never used the SBIC program. But for me, it made thedifference between not being able to do it, not having the money. Because itwas a risky kind of a business, I didn’t want to go out and ask friends to[laughs] put money into this crazy business. Most people didn’t know theterminology. So I give a lot of credit to the fact that the SBA gave me a loan of ten years,and $2 for every dollar that I put in, at 5 percent interest. That made thedifference for me to be able to commit my little $25,000 to going into givingentrepreneurs a chance to show what they could do. So they did a great job.Unfortunately, what happened to the SBIC program, they changed it slightly.It used to be straight loan and low interest. As the dollars got bigger—severalbillions of dollars went through the SBIC program—as that happened, andthey started thousands of these SBICs, and the bubble began to build up inventure capital in the technology world, they had a different system, whichwas a partnership system. Some people invested in it and took a few winnersout of the company and left the high-risk things in there. And it left the SBAholding the bag. And it wasn’t properly done. This was during that period ofthe late nineties. The SBA lost most of the $2 billion that they put in there. Now, how many companies and how much money was generated because ofthe money that that SBIC program was responsible for, I don’t know. Butprobably vastly more than the $2 billion that was lost. So I’m a bigenthusiastic supporter of that program. And then later, when Robin Richards and I started Draper International—Icame back from public service, from the Export-Import Bank, and fromworking at the UN—having worked in the government, I knew about theOverseas Private Investment [Corporation] company—very similar to theSBIC program. Except the concept there was that it was designed to enhancethe incentive for people to invest in developing countries. So I, having worked, as I say, at the UN and at the Export-Import Bank, Iwanted to do something international. We can talk about this later. But it doesconnect, in that when we started that up—as, again, something of anexperiment, to go to India with a venture capital program—I knew about theOPIC program. And having been successful with the SBIC program, I said,“Let’s go talk to OPIC about helping us invest in India.” 1994. We were thefirst venture capital company to go to India. Bar none. Of course now, thereare many, many, many of them. So that was really exciting, and theyleveraged our—. And our returns were something like sixteen times [snapsfingers] the limited partners’ money. They got sixteen times their money back,in six years. That was just a lot of lucky timing, a lot of lucky deals. But it wasalso the leverage that was supplied by the US government, the OPIC. So I have great respect for programs that will leverage, free of a lot of redtape, government programs that will leverage investments, the decisions beingmade by other people. But they can’t do it the way they changed the program,where they allow it as a partnership. They didn’t have a debt anymore andthey couldn’t collect on the debt. They were a partner in a program where theoperators were able to take money out and leave the government holding thebag. That wasn’t good. In this program, the whole concept is that we pay backthe government before we make any money. We owe a debt, and that debt’sgot to be paid before we make money. That’s the way it should work.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, let’s pick up on this leveraging theme as we talk about your lateractivities, because I have a feeling it’s going to enter in the Export-ImportBank. But I still haven’t finished with Sutter Hill. [laughs] Draper: Right, go ahead.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, you mentioned Paul Wythes and how you met him. I’m wonderingabout personalities and whether that came into the equation at all. The littlethat I know is that the two of you are fairly different in personality, andhence—and this is a guess on my part—in how you go about investing. 40 Draper: I don’t think so. Paul is more cautious, and I’m more of a risk taker, that’strue. But we both knew the importance of quality people—and that’s basic inventure. You’ve got to have people you trust. But more than that, people thatyou feel have the brainpower, the vision, the energy, the commitment to makesomething big. And all of those elements are really important, and I think Paulsees that just like I do. We didn’t have much difference of opinion on qualitypeople. That’s where you might fall apart and have problems in decidingwhether to do one thing or do another. But you’re right. I’m more likely to take a risk and not worry if it fails,because one hit, like an LSI Logic or a Corbin-Farnsworth—or in more recentterms, when I backed Skype. That paid for the entire portfolio, and it was asmall investment, but it returned a thousand times as much money. And soyou don’t worry. My attitude is you really cut to the chase, and you take risksif the potential is big. But if you don’t see a ten-for-one return, potentially,you probably shouldn’t even do it. You probably ought to just hold on to yourmoney.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So maybe that was what you were going on, because it seems to me that whenyou were first starting out, you didn’t have that kind of experience yet. Draper: No, I was more cautious. When I started with Pitch, we were cautious. Webacked a guy who had a check-weighing machine that tossed packages outthat were underweight, at high speed. It was an automation kind of a thing. Aguy named Joe Guili was the president of it, and Pitch and I bought 25 percentof the company for $60,000—and the company, I think, was doing a couplemillion dollars in sales—maybe not, but—it was a pretty good sized company!But things were different in those days. Valuations were lower. We wouldalways value the thing on the upside, one time sales. Now some can pay tentimes sales and not be worried. I’m worried, but value is in the eye of thebeholder. I’d say I was much more cautious in those days, because we couldnot afford to lose our money. You’re right. And yet we were taking risks onnew businesses. But if you back the right person, he’ll get you out of a bumbusiness, a bum product idea, a bum service idea, and move you into a betterone. If you back the wrong person with a great idea, you never get anywhere,because he just bumbles and fumbles.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So the people come first. Draper: So people come first, in my eyes, and I’ve always been very much that way. Ithink Paul felt much the same way. He has a mechanical engineeringbackground, but he wasn’t a driven engineer or he wouldn’t have been a venture capitalist, he’d be designing chips or something. So we got along verywell.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How much did you know that in advance? How much of a risk were youactually taking in going to Sutter Hill? Draper: But you know, you’re young, and you’re thirty-two years old, and you can’tgo wrong. You know you’re not going to fail. You just know it. [<|endoftext|>
Interviewerlaughs] So that’s important. Age has a lot to do with it. A good education. So Iknew quality people. I owe a lot to Yale and Harvard, because I met qualitypeople along the way. Scarsdale High School was high quality. So all the way,I’d been mixing it up with quality people. When a jerk came in, I knew itpretty fast.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You have the reputation of having a strong intuition about people. Draper: Yes, that’s true. I think that does come through. I know I hear that, too. I havea good feel for people. And matching people up. That’s important. Like thesethree guys that started Activision. They needed that fourth guy, who didn’twant to make games [laughs] the rest of his life. And he needed them. Youneeded a combination of people that would fit together, because sometimesthey’re just like oil and water and you can’t make them mix.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: There are a lot of things underlying all this, but it seems, also, that to be asuccessful venture capitalist, you have to be a people person. Because it’s notonly assessing people, it’s making things happen by drawing other people intoyour concept. Draper: I would say you’re right, if I didn’t know better. [laughter] In other words, Idon’t know many people who would describe Arthur Rock as a people person.Arthur Rock is a very intelligent guy who is a very successful venturecapitalist, but he’s not warm and fuzzy. He’s married to a warm and fuzzy gal.He’s smart enough to do that, and he also has a good feel for people, too, Ithink. A feel for it—but you don’t have to be warm and fuzzy. I would sayDon Valentine is not warm and fuzzy. He’s hardnosed, and very strict, tough,cut it off and—yet he knows marketing. See, Don knows marketing. He cameout of Intel marketing and knew the technology and the marketing, and thatcombination is very good in this field. Tom Perkins, I don’t think most peoplethink of him as warm and fuzzy.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. I wasn’t necessarily meaning warm and fuzzy. I guess I was moremeaning making things happen between people.  Draper: I think all of those people can do that, and are good at that. No, you’re right.They know where to put the pressure on and where to ease up, yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: In the end—and this is looking at it very crassly—money speaks. If you’recoming to a venture capitalist and you need the money to get your businessgoing, you’re probably going to have to have a very good reason not toagree—there’s the money, there’s the experience. Draper: That’s true. Well, a big part of a venture capitalist’s job is to coach theentrepreneur. It’s lonely at the top, as they say. The entrepreneur really wantssome coaching, very often, if it’s his first shot at running a company. Hedoesn’t want an over-hanging, overwhelming kind of a personality pushinghim, but he wants to know if he’s going in the right direction, where he shouldput his energy, wants to play off ideas. He has personnel problems among hisown staff—he has nobody to talk to in the staff. And so the venture capitalistcan perform a big service there, to being the coach or listening board for theCEO.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You can maybe lump that together under the term governance? Draper: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Stepping in and managing, or helping to manage companies. Was thatsomething that went back to Draper, Gaither & Anderson? Draper: Yes. Of course, I had good training at Inland Steel about how a big successfulcompany works. So I saw it—from a very low level, sales and sales manager.You kind of get it along the way as you go. I’m sure Joe Guili ofIllumitronics, our first investment, had a few laughs. Pitch Johnson and I,were aged thirty, and he was probably forty-five—he thought, well, these guysare [laughs] a little bit young to give me advice. But we would put thepressure on when we’d look at the numbers that did not meet expectations. It’sa kind of a relationship that builds as you begin to be tested and find thatyou’ve got good judgment or that they have faith in your ideas. But if I go ona board now, and it’s a young guy, he’s typically, as you say, very willing tolisten. And I’ve, by the way, got to be careful of that. Somebody like Bill Bowes is really good at listening. He’s very taciturn,doesn’t speak up aggressively or anything. He waits to be asked his advice,and then he just nails the subject perfectly. In other words, he’s a guy that Iwould go to for advice. He’s very intelligent, and he’s very cautious aboutjumping in when he doesn’t have all the facts. Lots of people in board meetings demonstrate their egos. You come across all kinds. I’ve been onthousands of boards, hundreds, anyway. You find people who want to talk justto listen to themselves talk. That gets to be a problem, a management problemfor the CEO. Try to get that person off the board, is his thought [chuckling].Or at least not have him dominate a board meeting. We pay a lot of attentionto the board management.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was this a new way of looking at investment? That it wasn’t just a matter ofputting money into a company, it was also a matter of building a company.Was that new? Draper: I think that was not new to Doriot. Doriot felt building a company was what itwas all about. Might’ve been new to some of the investment bankers in NewYork, when they thought about a quick transaction. Investment bankers oftendon’t make very good venture capitalists, because they think of thetransaction. They want to make it into a transaction. Turn it, flip it. They callit flipping the company now. You buy in and you sell it quickly. But the guyswho make the most money are builders. Arthur Rock, in Intel, wasinstrumental in his advice to the management team there, as they came out ofFairchild and were starting up on their own. He was an investment banker. SoI shouldn’t generalize. But some investment bankers just want to do the dealand move on. How do we flip this? And how do cash out, before they worryabout building the company.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But that was never the idea for any of those early partnerships that you wereassociated with? There was always the idea that we’re in this for the longterm, to build a company. Draper: Oh, yes. We knew they were long-term investments. It was never that we weregoing to sell it out next year. You just don’t do well if you have that attitude.You’re not really creating anything significant. It doesn’t give you anypleasure, either, if you’re just trying to flip it fast.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All through these two conversations we’ve had so far, I’ve noticed how oftenyou’re using what could be called social networks, your connections withpeople. Maybe it’s growing as you move from Draper, Gaither & Andersonthrough Draper Johnson, and finally to Sutter Hill Ventures—that if one isgoing to advise a new company in a full sense, it means knowing a lot aboutwho is out there to help. I mean in terms of banking, employment—all thethings that go into building a company. Draper: Exactly. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How did you make those connections—or did you—in those early days? Draper: We had a big Rolodex, and we literally had this Rolodex machine with thecards, and we’d just flip through, pre-computer. So you just use the Rolodex,and you’d look up—what was that guy’s name? And so accountants andlawyers and advisers of marketing, public relations people—you begin tobuild them as you go. So the first investment you make, with Joe Guili andIllumitronics, he’s not likely to get a hell of a lot from us, because we’re earlyin the game. We know a few people in the steel business, but that doesn’t helphim much [chuckling]. I had had three years of gathering some connections,and so on, at Draper, Gaither & Anderson, but it wasn’t like it would be today,or when I was right in the center of the Sutter Hill days, when we had just allkinds of people that wanted to know us. The head of Goldman Sachs cameinto our office at Sutter Hill. We were new. Venture capital was new. ButGoldman Sachs knew something was going on out here, and so he came out.That was kind of an eye opener, [laughs] because we thought, my God! Wedidn’t have offices any bigger than this one.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So it’s happening in many ways. You’re going out and finding the people youneed, but as you become known, people are coming to you. Draper: Yes, then they come to us, that’s true. It works both ways. That’s a goodobservation.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How did people think about Sutter Hill Ventures in those days? Draper: You can ask other people what they thought and think today. Not verydifferent from what it is today, except I think it was more on the forefront thanit is. There’re so many more competitors now. But it was thought to be veryhigh quality, friendly people who were very professional and straightforward.What we used to do, every entrepreneur that came in, gave them a list with thetelephone numbers of everybody we had invested in, so that they could callany of them. And we didn’t call to say, “You tell them this or that.” Becausewe were very proud of our reputation, because it was always oriented towardtrying to support the entrepreneur and be a friend, and be honest andstraightforward with them, as well as help them get farther down the line.Now, that doesn’t mean we didn’t have arguments and disagreements atdifferent times with different management teams, but there was a quality lookto us. We had hired Len Baker. I think he graduated second in his class at StanfordBusiness School. He was a Yale mathematics major. We hired DaveAnderson, who was an MIT graduate, and a very soft, sweet, friendly personality. The four of us ran it for the length of time until I went toWashington. When I left, a couple of people came on. But it was really a goodfirm. It would have been ranked—anybody that named the top three firmswould’ve named Sutter Hill. I would say every third person would’ve namedit as the best. So I would say the others were Kleiner—and Mayfield was wellthought of early on and has lost a little of its luster, but God, it’s such a bigfield now.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Would Sutter Hill be up there today? Draper: Yes. It would, for the investors that know it, like you talk to Yale, you talk toMIT, Stanford. Well, I’ll give you a specific. My partner Howard Hartenbaumtalked to the guy that runs the Princeton endowment. Howard said, “Whowere the best companies that you invested in, in the venture world?” He said,“There are only two that have the very best records.” He said, “Sutter Hill andSequoia.” And they’re in tons of them, Kleiner and many others. NEA and allthe others. So they still have a very superb reput[ation]. But they don’t do anyPR. And it’s very “come to me” kind of thing. It’s not reaching out to try andbe in the news or getting Colin Powell to be your limited partner. That kind ofthing. They don’t do that—and the general partners own more than half thefirm now. The limited partners, it’s just a money machine. [laughs] They do itright, they do it carefully, they do it very slowly. They’re not risk takers, inthe sense that I am by myself, in other words. I think it would be a bigger firmtoday, probably, if I were still there, but it wouldn’t be a better firm. I thinkit’s great. I’m a limited partner of it, in a small way. But they’re really neatpeople. Every one of them. A guy who was Tim’s classmate is running it. Myson’s classmate from Harvard Business School is Tench Coxe. Bill Youngerand Tench run the firm. They have a great team. It’s a wonderful group ofpeople.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You mentioned last time that Sutter Hill was an early investor in Hybritech? Draper: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I believe Hybritech was the first monoclonal antibody company. Draper: Yes. PSA test. We sold the company to [Eli] Lilly, and Lilly continued togrow. I held onto that stock, and it was a really good one.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you remember that deal in any specifics? Because that was a radically newtechnology.  Draper: I know it was, and it was not because of anything that I knew about thattechnology. I wasn’t the point guy on that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It was Byers, wasn’t it? Draper: Yes. Brook Byers. He was with—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Kleiner Perkins. Draper: At Sutter Hill, maybe it was Dave Anderson. I’m not sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was Kleiner the lead investor? Draper: Well, I told you we didn’t have that. We all went in with about the sameamount of money, typically.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Nowadays, when you say lead investor, does that usually imply that moremoney was put in by that firm?million, and I wanted two others to each put in $2 million. I might be the leadinvestor because I negotiated the deal, I set up the board, but I asked you guysto come on, so I might be given that title today, I suppose, I don’t know.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I think we should stop after Sutter Hill, but I want to give you a chance to sayanything more about Sutter Hill that we may have missed. Draper: Sutter Hill was a great experience. I was at Sutter Hill for twenty years. I feltthat it was a real contribution to the area, to the industry, and I think it was abig part of my legacy. The other thing about Sutter Hill is I would be willingto bet that the return on investment is higher than any other venture capitalcompany in the country.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you think? Draper: Don’t know the statistics, but I’m pretty sure of that. Princeton seems tohave—Yale will tell you definitely it’s the best. But as I said, I was a trustee ofYale, and I was on the advisory committee for Dave [David F.] Swensen, who’s brilliant in his management of the endowment. You can see I ambiased.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I think we should stop there for today, because we’re now ready tomove into different territory. Draper: Good. Okay.[End of Interview]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Last time—unless you have more thoughts on the subject—we concluded withSutter Hill. I believe that the next step in your life was the run for Congress? Draper: Oh, well, that was in the middle of Sutter Hill [laughs]. I took a very shorttime, because as it turned out, I didn’t win it. Shirley Temple [Black] didn’twin, either. We split the more conservative vote, and [Paul Norton] PeteMcCloskey, [Jr.] won a plurality. It’s a very good thing for me that he did,because I don’t think it would’ve been a good time for me. I still hadn’t madea big enough splash in venture capital, and I still was looking at the future. Itmight have changed my—who knows what would have happened? Butanyway, the point is, it was a special election. I think the congressman diedsomewhere in the summer. Anyway, the election was taking place inNovember, a special election. It was about a three-month race or somethinglike that. Quite unlike [Barack] Obama and [Hillary] Clinton today. God, thatgoes on and on! Those poor people! But I loved the experience of running.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why was that? Draper: Oh! It was spectacular! It’s a very humbling experience for anyone whoplunges into the public issues and knows as little as I did. There were aboutten in the race, but the three of us that came up on top all knew each other—one from Hillsborough, one from Atherton, and one from Woodside, I think.The three of us were all thirty-nine years old. We were in Time magazinebecause of Shirley Temple. It was watched nationally, just because of her. Bythe way, I just saw she’s just about to turn eighty, and there’s an article in theSunday New York Times about her. There’s a new DVD that’s come out—about her later life, maybe, I don’t know. She became an ambassador to theCzech Republic. We had a lot of fun, all three of us. But the problem was, Vietnam was the hot issue. The only issue. And so wewould go to a school auditorium and there’d be ten of us in a row there, allwith a minute and a half to tell, [laughs] in brief, what we felt should be doneabout Vietnam. Should we finish the job? Pete McCloskey, I think with themajority of the electorate, said, “Pull the plug, go home, get out of Vietnam.”Shirley and I were saying, well, let’s finish the job and not pull out. I went toVietnam during the election. [laughs] Probably not a very brilliant politicalmove, because it was a period that was pretty critical getting around, and Itook about a week. It’s amazing how important one week is in a short race.When I saw that it was the big issue I thought I’d better go find out on myown—at least be sure of my ground and at least know the ground. So I felt sure and I got to know the ground, but it was an arguable issue, and Iwas in the minority, I think, along with Shirley. Shirley was moreconservative than I was. I was kind of in the middle. Which would be a goodplace to be, ordinarily, but Pete did a very good job of just analyzing. He’s agood lawyer, and he analyzed the strategy of just pulling out. Because he wasalone, we divided the vote. But going into people’s homes and talking about their issues and theimportance of a congressman to them—it’s about a quarter of a million peoplethat you represent, at that time, anyway. It is probably three- or four-hundredthousand, maybe 500,000 now. But the experience for me was terrific. Itopened my eyes to a lot of problems and interesting facts about our county. Iran in San Mateo County.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And did it have repercussions in keeping you engaged, at least at the personallevel, in local politics? Draper: Well, it was an indication that I was interested in getting beyond venturecapital and doing something that might be outside of our own community. I’msure it was an indication—my running right there. I was asked by a couple ofgood friends, Stu Leeb and Bill [William C.] Edwards, at a breakfast atRickey’s [Restaurant], to run. The reason for that was because I was, at thattime, president of the Republican Alliance, which is a little like the LincolnClub today—professional businessmen, lawyers, and other professionals thatwere Republicans, but almost to a man, moderate Republicans. I say to a man,because I don’t know that there were any women in it those days. [laughs]Today, it would be a very different story. We’d meet and have guest speakers. Governor Reagan came up when he wasthinking of running for president and talked with us, or we’d have a senatorthat was running. It was very interesting. California was a smallerenvironment at that time. People knew each other more—or it seemed to methat way. Maybe it’s not true. But it was a very friendly, open environment, and I had a good time in that. So that’s why they thought of me for runningwhen this fellow named Congressman [Arthur] Younger died.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did the decision to run have any bearing on your feelings about venturecapital as a career? Draper: No, I knew venture capital at that point—hadn’t made much money on it. Itwas still very new at that time. We had made the Measurex deal. That was acompany I may have told you about. Dave [David A.] Bossen was coming outhere. On a vacation in Chicago, I went to call on a friend of mine who was inthe investment business, and he said, “If you’re in the venture capitalbusiness, you might want to meet up with Dave Bossen, who’s just come outto the West Coast. And so when I came back, I looked him up and helped himfind some technology people, because he wanted to do a similar thing to whathe had done for his other company, measuring the thickness and moisturecontent of paper in a paper mill, online, in real time. He didn’t have any technology, he just had the management experience, buthe was at cross purposes with the CEO. He was more or less a general—like aCOO. And so he broke away. He wanted to come to California and do it, andwent into competition with this other company. He did very, very well, and wewent on the New York Stock Exchange and eventually sold it to Honeywell.But I bring that up because I got that deal put together and raised some otherventure money, together with ours, and we had a really good experience. He’sa top flight executive, and if you have that kind of person in command, it’smuch easier being a board member and you enjoy the board meetings. In fact, we got to the point where we could go to various parts of the world,wherever they had trees, because his business involved paper and paperrequires trees. The essence of the business was to measure—paper is basicallymade out of pulp and water. You look through a piece of yellow foolscappaper, and you’ll see blotches. That means there’s more pulp in those placeswhere you see [it’s] thicker. So the thinner you make it, the more water yousell in the paper, the cheaper it is [chuckles]. But you want the consistency. Sonot necessarily very cheap paper, but whatever it is, it should be consistentand that’ll save costs, big costs, eventually. So these were big, quarter of amillion dollar machines that were doing this. And it was a lot of fun. PeteBancroft came in to Measurex. I called him and asked him if he didn’t want tojoin.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How had you known Pete Bancroft? Draper: He came to take my place when I left Draper, Gaither & Anderson, and to joinPitch Johnson. 50<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. Well, you talk with great animation about the Measurex deal. It seems tome that if you had been successful politically, it would have meant giving upventure capital, at least for a period. Draper: Oh, I would’ve given it up for good.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Would you? Draper: Oh, sure. That would’ve been a whole new career. You can’t go into Congressand then leave in two years. People who had put—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, you can if you’re not reelected. [laughs] Draper: —faith in you—you just wouldn’t do that. You can be thrown out.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That’s what I was trying to get at, whether you were contemplating a careerredirection. Draper: Absolutely. So yes, I have always had a pull toward public service, I think. Itstarted with my father, as I told you. But then that [race] indicated it more. Ofcourse, it didn’t happen. And as I say, I’m glad it didn’t, because I really wasable to establish a financial base for me and my family, which I didn’t have. Ididn’t have that much money at that point.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It seems to me because you had that financial base, you could do some publicservice, just in a different way. Draper: Sure. And so when I was asked by George Bush to join him and RonaldReagan, it was a no-brainer. I wanted to do that, to run the Export-ImportBank. And that was easy, because I had made all the money, much moremoney than I ever dreamed I would. And so I could be comfortable.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was it Measurex that gave you the financial boost? Draper: Oh, it was a whole series of companies. In fact, that was one, but it wasn’tanywhere near the biggest.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why did you leave Draper Gaither & Anderson?  Draper: I left Draper Gaither & Anderson because I wanted to do something on myown. I really did. My father was one of the three main characters, of course, asI told you, and I learned the business after three years. I brought them threevery good deals. I think Pete would tell you that the best deals were mine,which he took over.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Which are the three? Draper: I told you about the Corbin-Farnsworth. Another is Western Rubber, which Ithink I also may have briefly mentioned. For schoolyards, under jungle gyms,a rubber foam flooring, basically, that interlocked. Not a very high-tech thing,but it turned out to be a good investment. And let’s see, there was a third onethat I was involved in, and I can’t right now recall.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: In my mind, and certainly in some of the literature, venture capital is almostmarried to the concept of high technology. And yet you’ve mentioned severaldeals which really weren’t high technology; they were good companies thatneeded a jump start through venture capital. Is it misleading to pair venturecapital and high tech? Draper: Well, high tech today is a little different than high tech back in 1965. Thismeasuring the thickness of moisture in paper was very high tech. And highspeed. The Corbin Farnsworth was clearly high tech. That was the firstdefibrillator.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I was thinking of the flooring. Draper: The flooring was not. No, you’re right. That was just an opportunisticinvestment that was very high quality; it was well-run, and so on.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So it tells me, anyway, that you were looking for opportunity more or lesswherever you encountered it. Would you say that’s accurate? Draper: When Pitch and I were in business, we each leased a car. First time I knewyou could do that. You leased the car for the company, and then we bothneeded a car to go around, because we only each had one car, which our wivestook over. So we would look for something that said electronics on the nameor sounded technical. We would also respond very quickly to technologythings, but it is true that we would be happy to go into some “specialsituation,” which I mentioned General Anderson used to call the wholebusiness. Some of them were high tech and some were growth companies that were doing well, but might not have been very special technically. But thebulk of them were technical. In order to get fast growth, you didn’t go into agrocery store hoping it would be a chain. But there are those that become veryfast growing, and you find the Wal-Marts of the world. But they come alongvery seldom, and they would not be a very good investment for venturecapital.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is the next stage the Export-Import Bank, where you started in 1981? Draper: Yes. Started in 1981, knew nothing about it [chuckles], except that I knewnumbers pretty well. I’m pretty good at that. I ended up just walking into thefirst government job I had ever had. There was a friend of mine from Yale,Ray [Raymond J.] Albright. I went to see him to just ask, well, what’s thisplace like, because he was a vice president there. He explained a little about it.I knew generally the mission, which was to promote American exports andlend money to foreign countries or to foreign customers, private companies,that would buy American products. The loans were on very favorable terms.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is it in New York? Draper: No, no, it’s in Washington. It’s a government agency. It’s totally owned bythe US government, and it’s an independent agency, so we had twoRepublicans and two Democrats on the board. Whoever is chairman, whateverparty he’s with, becomes the fifth board member. Yes, I think that’s it. Itcould be that there needs to be an independent on there. But anyway, we hadthe mission of trying to promote American exports, and so I met with thepresident[s] of General Electric and Boeing, and all the big exporters werevery interested in this financial facility to help their customers buy theirproducts. I got in there, and there were a couple of experiences that were quiteinteresting. Freddie [Sir Frederick Alfred] Laker, [who] started LakerAirlines—it was a cheap airline across the ocean, between London and NewYork. He had five airplanes, and he borrowed from the Export-Import Bankbefore I got there. I first met him, and [him] being financially astute, I askedhim, “Well, how will this work, if you are selling your tickets for the Londonpassengers coming here, in pounds, and you’re paying us interest in dollars,you’re paying your depreciation on the airplanes in dollars, and you’re payingthe gasoline for fuel in dollars—and if the pound moves, you’re going to havea difficult time paying.” He said, “Bill, you don’t understand the business. Thewhole business is about filling the seats with more bloody arses.” [laughter] He had flown over to see me in my office, and then I went off to see him,particularly after I learned—we’ll call it six, eight months later—that just what I had said happened, and he got into trouble, to the point where he wasgoing into bankruptcy quick. So we ended up with five airplanes, and theywere taken immediately to the desert, down near Tucson. I think they call it agraveyard for planes. But it’s very dry air so they don’t depreciate veryquickly. They keep a lot of airplanes there that are out of service, and so allfive of them were down there. So I got a lot of talk from my staff, “You’vegot to get rid of those airplanes because we’re not meant to be holding assets.”I said, “Well, I really don’t think the market’s there. Nobody’s interested inbuying airplanes.” Right after Reagan took over, remember, the interest rates were jacked way upby [Chairman of the Federal Reserve, Paul A.] Volcker, which was the rightthing to do at that time, and it stalled the economy and there was a problem.So anyway, nobody was buying airplanes. So I just sat on them for a year orso, and the market turned rather quickly. So SAS [Scandinavian Airlines]came to us and bought three airplanes at our cost. I had not wanted to breakthe price, see. I wanted to get our full value out of it, the full market price thatwe had paid for the airplanes—Freddie Laker had paid, with our money. So Iasked SAS if they would take five. They wouldn’t. They just wanted three.But it wasn’t long before United learned about the sale, and they said, “Well,we’d like to buy the other two airplanes.” I said, “Oh, the price has gone up.”[chuckles] And so we got our interest back off those other two, but we stilldidn’t get the interest on the other three. So then it happened that I kept getting visits from the president of BritishAirways. He came over, and he said he wanted us to sign a release, because hewanted to get this whole thing cleaned up and there was some question aboutwhether Laker had been put out of business by British Airways. I said, “Well,we’d be happy to do that.” But he said something about—it just slipped outthat they were paying Freddie Laker $8 million. I said, “You’re payingFreddie Laker $8 million?” He had common stock, and we, of course, had aloan in there which was not fully paid, in the sense that we never got theinterest back. So I said, “As soon as we get our full interest back, we’d behappy to sign off, but you’re not going to pay off Freddie Laker,” which theywere doing. They were essentially paying him off so he wouldn’t sue them forputting him out of business—which I don’t think would be a legitimate suit,but it was a threat. I learned later that the reason they were so anxious to get this done was theywere trying to take British Airways private. It was then owned by thegovernment, but they wanted to go private. So I said no. So he went back, andhe kept wanting me to make a deal of something less than getting the fullamount. I’ve never had more fun with a negotiation, because I realized hereally wanted to make this deal! And he, of course, had the very fast planethat came over the— <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, Concorde. Draper: The Concorde. So he’d appear in my office about every week. [<|endoftext|>
Interviewerlaughs] I thought—things are going pretty well, so I just was very polite tohim when we had lunch or whatever, but I never budged on the price. Thenext thing I know, [Prime Minister] Maggie Thatcher is over at the WhiteHouse, and I’m getting a call from the State Department. “You’ve got to makea deal! Because this has become a matter of state politics!” I said, “Fine. Allthey have to do is pay us our full amount, and I’m happy to make a deal.”Which I knew could be done. So after a couple more trips back and forth, hesigned off. Later, a friend of mine said that there was a guy over at the State Department[who] said, “That Draper at the Export-Import Bank, he treats that money likeit’s his own money!” [laughter] That was the best compliment I got inWashington! But it worked. So we got it. And of course, everything workedfine, and British Airways went private, and we got all of our money back outof those airplanes. So that was a little vignette about business in Washington. There was a case where Egypt wanted a nuclear power plant, and they wantedus to lend money from the Export-Import Bank. We have economists there,and they were pointing out that Egypt gets their money from tourism and fromthe Suez Canal, and I think some oil. But they were not going to have enoughto pay back the big loans that it took to build a nuclear power plant. So weturned this down, we as the board of the Export-Import Bank. Well, then I gota call from the White House and they said, “Hey, this isn’t so good. We reallyought to go along with it.” Then the next thing I knew, I got called over to theWhite House, and two people over there—one was the national securityadvisor and the other was Ed Meese—they sat me down and they said, “HeyDraper,” the security advisor said, “This is a case of war or peace.” I didn’t goany further into it. I said, “Hey, if this is a case of war or peace—.” I didn’t tryto dig or say, hey, you’re crazy.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you got out of it? Draper: No, so we agreed to sign off. We agreed to make the loan to Egypt, becausethe US government wanted to help Egypt move this forward. But in theagreement—oh, the problem was that their oil in the country was not atmarket prices. They were selling their own oil at a very subsidized rate. So Igot them to agree to raise the price of oil 15 percent every year, in order to getin better position when the big payments for the nuclear power plant camealong. In the end, they never did build a nuclear power plant [chuckles]. Wemade the agreement, but they never built it. President Mubarak found it to bepolitically incorrect at that time. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And what about the loan? You never made it? Draper: No, the loan was an agreement to make the loan to buy the nuclear powerplant, but they never ended up executing it. By the way, while at the Ex-ImBank, I authorized the first loan to China. Deng Chou Ping told me of his planprovinces to “let them become rich.” Of course he was successful. Today,they’re lending us a lot more money than we ever loaned them [chuckles]. There was another interesting situation. I won’t get too technical, but I wentover to the OECD meetings, and then there was a group of other countries thathad export-import banks, promoting their own exports. Japan would come. Itwas mostly Japan and France, Germany and England. We had longnegotiations, because interest rates had gone high, but we were still charging7½ percent for our loans and interest rates were up around 12 percent, asubsidy of almost five percentage points. If you extrapolate that over twentyyears, you buy the plane for Singapore Airlines, who can afford to buy theplane anyway. The American taxpayer’s buying them the airplane. So I cameback frustrated from these meetings in Paris because they wouldn’t budge.These Europeans and the Japanese were very slow to raise their rates to nearmarket rates. They love subsidy. So I came back to Washington and I justunilaterally raised our rates.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You could do that? Draper: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You must’ve had board approval, right? Draper: Yes. But the board usually supports the chairman.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: They’re a rubber stamp? Draper: No, they’re not a rubber stamp, but we are cooperative, and I was the leader ofthe group. They understood why I wanted to do this, because it was costingthe taxpayers so damn much money, the difference in margins. But of course,there were the people that didn’t want to see this happen, the president ofBoeing, for example. So I debated T.A. [Thornton Arnold] Wilson, who wasthen the president of Boeing on the Lehrer news hour [the MacNeil/LehrerReport] and Nightline with—what’s his name? <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is that [Walter] Cronkite? Draper: No. Ted Koppel at Nightline. (I’ll tell you a story about Cronkite.) [I] debatedWilson on these various programs. I was interviewed by this other—it was ahot subject, because it was a conflict of interest. They wanted to be able togive cheap financing for their airplanes, but every time the Europeans wereselling their airplanes against ours, we were always winning anyway,regardless of the financing. And it’s true, it went on because we had betterproducts. But these debates got pretty animated—and I was pointing out thatthe American taxpayer is losing this much on every airplane, and Wilsonwould say, “We’re going to lose these jobs in Seattle!,” and all this. And so itgot to be kind of exciting.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] You liked that? Draper: Yes. Charlie Rose interviewed me. He’s a wonderful guy.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What are we talking about, early eighties, was this going on? Draper: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now, step back a minute. Why did Reagan appoint you? How did he knowabout you? Draper: Because of George [H.W.] Bush. See, I was asked by George Bush to be hisfinancial chairman for Northern California, when he was running againstReagan for president—then it became finance chairman for California, andthen it became co-finance chairman for the whole country, together with hisbrother, Jonathan Bush. Robert [A.] Mosbacher, [Jr.] was the financechairman, and the two of us were co-chairmen nationally. So I got very muchinto that. I raised a lot of money for George Bush.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But all this started because of your reputation in making good deals in venturecapital? Draper: Yes. There was a friend of mine and George Bush, a man named George Pfau,who suggested that I would do well at this because I had raised money forYale. I was chairman of the major gifts for Yale for the fourteen westernstates during a Yale campaign. So George suggested to Bush that I do this. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. It was clear you were good with money. Draper: Yes, right. So that ended up being a very good move for me, because itchanged my life. I loved George Bush, and he being a Yalie to boot.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, the network. Draper: We had a community of interest there.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, how did it change your life? Draper: I ended up going to Washington, and I ended up going to the UN. I wouldn’thave done any of those things. I would’ve stayed—unless I had some otheropportunity—which I did have once. When Nixon was elected, the man whowas the lieutenant governor of California, Bob [Robert H.] Finch, was askedto be the head of HEW [Health, Education, and Welfare], because he wantedto be, I think, chief of staff for Nixon, but didn’t get that job. He asked me,because I had been helpful to him, to come back to Washington. But then Iwas just a young squirt that didn’t have any money, and I said, “No, I betterstay with my venture capital here.” But this time I was ready to go, and that’s how I got there, working againstReagan. [chuckles] But I got to love the guy. I think he was a marvelouspresident, because he understood the job so well. He understood it’s a big—it’s the image, and not jumping in and being the first one to draw the line inthe sand, but being, “well, maybe we can think about that.” He was so gentle,and yet he had some core beliefs that were tough—very small government andbig defense and low taxes. I think that was the heart of his—and he didn’tvary much from that. I met with him a number of times in the White House, inthe cabinet room, with a group that included the independent agencies, ofwhich I represented one. Like the SEC is an independent agency. Anyway, itwas a great experience back there. That was all about the Export-Import Bank.But then the other fun part of it was getting to know other people inWashington and cooperating with them on certain things. The learning curvewas very steep for me.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I can imagine, yes. Draper: When I went back, Jim [James A.] Baker, [III] asked me to be the number twoin presidential personnel, until they got that better organized. This was rightafter Reagan was elected, and even though I wouldn’t go join the ExportImport Bank until, say, August of that year, he wanted me back to help organize and put some computers back into the personnel office. [laughs]Being out here, they thought I had some technology background, but also theyjust wanted somebody they trusted. Baker was back there because of Bush.And so Baker and Bush and I were good friends, and the other one was thesecretary of commerce, Mac Baldridge, who was also a Bush person. The restof them were pretty much Reagan people. I mean they were on his team all theway through. So I did that. I was in the White House for about six months and that wasreally something. It was like drinking out of a fire hose, because the daybegan at seven o’clock in the morning and you didn’t get back [home] untilmidnight. When I first went there, there were 25,000 résumés in the backroom, just locked in a closet, people had sent them in unsolicited. Someonejust packed them up and left them there. No organization to it. It was really aquite interesting experience. So I met with Baker and Meese and Deaver.Mike [Michael K.] Deaver was his PR guy, Reagan’s public relations person.Ed Meese became the attorney general later, but he was in the White House.So it was a triumvirate, those three, with Baker being the chief of staff. Theyeach had a title, but they acted in unison pretty much. We met every day atfive o’clock in the afternoon, on personnel matters, for six months. I learned alot in that time. I would say it was a real high in my life. There was a lot ofexcitement.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: When you say you learned a lot, are you thinking in a very broad way—yourhorizons were expanding? Or are you thinking about picking up specific kindsof information that you hadn’t encountered before? Draper: My horizons were expanding at a rapid rate, yes. Both things are true, you’repicking up—I didn’t have a course where I say, this will help me in being abetter venture capitalist, if that’s what you’re driving at. I just wanted to havea full life and do as much as I could in the way of helping other people; and byso doing, I helped myself. I have a great belief that the more you help otherpeople, the more you help yourself. I was just helping George Bush when hewas running for president, to become president, not because I thought that wasgoing to get me back to Washington or anything; I just thought, he’s a goodman. I’d like to help him, whatever he wants me to do, and that’s been a prettygood philosophy over my life, is to try and do as many things for other peopleas I can and see where it leads me. But I don’t have a goal to get to a certainpoint, a certain business position, a certain political position, a certain dollarnet worth or anything. I’m just having a good time. [laughter] And I was backthen! Phyllis loved going back to Washington, too because she got a job as the—Loret [Miller] Ruppe was another Bush appointee, and she ran the PeaceCorps. So my wife went to work for the Peace Corps for five years, and that was a great experience for her. I married her straight out of college, agetwenty-one, and she never worked. So she was very excited by a real career, areal job that was very challenging. She was Loret Ruppe’s direct assistant.That made it fun. And socially, it was good because the Export-Import Bankhad to keep up with lots of other countries that had embassies there inWashington, so we had a very active social life, from her point of view, and Ihad an active life professionally, in just keeping track of a variety ofinternational aspects of the job. I started to tell you about Walter Cronkite—during that sensitive period whereI was at odds with the Boeing people and really, GE, too, by the way. Jack[John Francis] Welch, [Jr.] didn’t like what I’d done too, but he wasn’t quiteas active on it. But this is a different experience. I was invited over to 60Minutes to be interviewed on 60 Minutes. Not over there; they came to myoffice. I had one of the biggest offices in Washington. It was as big as theOval Office, because it was built years ago, during the Depression, when theguy who came from Texas, built it; he wanted to look down on the young manin the White House. He was a big cheese because he was also in charge of, Iguess, one of the big programs that helped—the WPA or something like that.Who’s the guy at 60 Minutes that’s so interesting and active? Do you everwatch 60 Minutes?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I haven’t watched it for a while. Draper: I asked Walter Cronkite out here—he was a member of the same camp of theBohemian Grove that I’m in—and we’re both there stark naked in the shower,and I ask, “Well, what would it be like to be interviewed by 60 Minutes?” Atthat time, they had this reputation for cutting and pasting—and he said, “I’lltell you what you should do.” He was a part of CBS at the time. He said, “Youought to tell him that you’re going to tape the program.” So that if they cut ortook things out of context, you would have a case that they had reallymisrepresented you. The reason they wanted to talk to me was my predecessor had made a badloan to the Congo, to Zaire. Mobutu was the president of Zaire. The idea wasto build a big power plant, a power line across the Congo, across Zaire. So thefirst thing I was asked was—and I was brand new on the job—“What do youthink of these World Bank reports?” And I said, “Oh, I think very highly ofthem.” [He] said, “Would it surprise you to know that the World Bank reporton this issue of this loan to Zaire said it’s a disaster and it was a miserabledecision, and that the Export-Import Bank never should’ve made this loan?”[laughs] Well, I was kind of caught, you know. All of a sudden thecameraman said something had gone wrong with the camera. So I was askedto do it again. So he said, “What do you think of the World Bank reports?” 60And I said, “Oh, I don’t know. Some are good and some are bad.” [laughter]And he cracked up, just the way you are! And there was another fun thing about that interview. He had been sittingtalking to me, and he was sitting on my desk, and I could see that his coat hadbeen bought in Toronto. It just happened to stick in my mind. So he said, atthe end of all this, “Well, I guess you do pretty good things for the ExportImport Bank. The Export-Import Bank does good things for the country inexports, but the big problem in this country is the imports keep increasing. It’snot so much that the exports aren’t growing, but they’re not growing as fast asall the imports.” I said, “You know, that’s really true. For example, itwould’ve been great if you had bought that suit in this country.” [laughter] Hesaid, “What do you mean? What do you mean?” He never did admit it. I’m sosorry I can’t come up with his name. That was a fun interview, as it turnedout. I walked around the block thinking, God, they’re going to really makemincemeat of me, probably, on Sunday night when this comes out.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And did they? Draper: No. As it turned out, they made a little report that— Oh, by the way, he toldme, “Would it surprise you to know that Mobutu has three houses in Belgium,chateaus?” And I said no. He said, “All that cash that you loaned himprobably ended up there.” I said, “Well, one thing I do know, and that is thatwe never give cash to any country. We just pay the exporter, and the exporterships the product. You can’t put a Caterpillar tractor in a Swiss bank account.”[laughter] And I thought, ooh, I’ve won. Then the more I thought about it,walking around the block waiting, that Sunday night, for the program, Ithought, oh, I was a little too smart, and so I worried. But it turned out they didn’t show any of it. They just reported somethingabout the Export-Import Bank had made a bad loan in Zaire. See, if I hadn’tgone to be interviewed, they would’ve had an empty chair there and said, theExport-Import Bank chairman would not meet with us, and here is this report.So I had to do it. But I didn’t know much about the bank, or much aboutpolitics, or much about interviewing. But I felt that was an interview thatcame off pretty darn well.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All right. You were finding opportunities. And I imagine one of theopportunities that cropped up was the UN Development Program. How didthat evolve?  Draper: Well, I decided I wanted to go back to California, after five years running theExport-Import Bank, and having a lot of fun, liking the job, but feeling mylearning curve had flattened out, that my contribution, which was to pushmore private sector thinking into the bank, but also trying to reduce thesubsidy, which I did significantly—I think I saved $10 billion for theAmerican taxpayer. That’s peanuts today, but in those days it was not aninsignificant number.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Just making sure that they were— Draper: Well, just that subsidy on the interest rates that I did. Oh, I didn’t tell you thefinal on that. I jumped the interest rate, but about three weeks later, theEuropeans came in and followed me. Well, after that was over, then of course,Boeing felt better and everybody felt better. I knew they would. I just knewsomebody had to show leadership and do it, and then the others would follow.But there are a lot of bureaucrats who don’t want to make a move and thinkyou’re tricking them and so on.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: When you made a move like that, taking a leadership position, did you spendany sleepless nights? Draper: None. [laughs] Because I knew I was right. I was representing the Reaganadministration that didn’t like subsidies, that wanted to reduce— Reaganwould have us meet every so often and show how we’ve reduced our budgetby 10 percent for the year.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Really? Draper: Oh, yes. He was definitely strict on wanting the size of government to comedown, and so we all worked hard on trying to do that. He knocked out lotsof—the regulations used to be like this [gestures] under the Democrats, and[only] about a third were in when he left. So I had all that to carry over to thisindependent agency, because I did want to do things that would berepresentative of what I considered to be good management: reducing the coststructures and yet getting the job done of promoting American exports.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, it sounds as though Reagan policy and your personal views were prettymuch in line. Draper: Yes. They were. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were there ever cases where they weren’t? Draper: No. Well, I went into the White House to argue for a certain expansion of onepart of the bank, so I needed extra budget. I negotiated with Dean [meansDavid A.] Stockman, the budget director in the White House, because Icouldn’t get it just talking to Ed Meese, who would meet with us to kind offigure out what— So he said, “Well, do you want to meet with the presidenton it?” “Yes, I do.” And so Stockman and I, at loggerheads, argued. One,Stockman trying to hold stiff to keep the budget down and don’t give anyexpansion here. Despite my understanding his position, I felt this was a reallygood argument to stretch our mission and so on. So I had a debate with him in front of Reagan and George Bush. [laughs] Andthat was quite an experience for me, because Stockman had an agile mind andwas a very good debater. In the final analysis, then, Reagan kind of closed themeeting saying, “Well, I think it would be better to sell the Chineseautomobiles instead of bicycles.” [laughs] That was the way he summarized!He was sympathizing with our trying to push bigger products, and biggerloans to make those products in essence. But he didn’t make any decision onthe issue, he just left the room. Ultimately, I think there was a slight compromise, but I didn’t get everything Iwanted. It was a great experience. Everybody that gets any opportunity to goto work for a local government or a state government, or to go to Washington,or an international operation—which we can talk about—should do it becauseit’s just such an eye opener to—so many issues that you never think of whenyou’re just focused on your business, your social life, and your town.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Okay. The UN Development Program. Draper: Yes, so I got called by the White House, saying that there was going to be achange in the American that was running the United Nations DevelopmentProgram. Well, I didn’t know what that was, [laughs] like most Americans.But they pointed out, and I learned pretty quickly, that it was a massiveprogram. It’s a very interesting, big operation. And so I expressed interest init, called about five people for advice. One was George Bush, Senior, andGeorge [P.] Shultz, another was Tom [Alden Winship] Clausen, who was thenpresident of the World Bank, and a couple others. They all thought that it wasa really interesting job, and they were absolutely right. I don’t think any ofthem knew how interesting it was. So I decided to take that job, and I went up to New York, had never been inthe UN building. I met a wonderful man there, my first visit, who had beenpresident of the Jamaican airlines. He was Jamaican, and he was my deputy. He later became head of the Jamaican central bank. [G.] Arthur Brown washis name, probably one of the most intelligent people I’ve ever worked with,or perhaps the most [intelligent] and with good judgment, as well. You canhave a lot of bright people, but you’ve got to have that judgment. So he helpedme get my feet on the ground and understand the job. Javier [Pérez de] Cuellar was the secretary general at the time. He’s fromColombia [means Peru], later ran for president—didn’t win—of Colombia[means Peru]. But he was the secretary general. My job, as it turned out— Ididn’t realize this when I went, but it turns out I was the second rankingperson in the UN, because it was a coordinating—I had this 8,000-personoperation to run. But I also had responsibility for coordinating the other aidorganizations of the UN. So UNICEF and the UN Environment Program,the—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All the other agencies. Draper: Yes, but of course, I was an undersecretary general, but there were probablyfifteen others who were undersecretary generals. But I got $50 more per yearthan the others, because of this added responsibility [chuckles]. There was nodeputy secretary general at that time. Now there is. But at that time, I, in away, was that. So that was a big-time job, and a fascinating job, had 8,000people, as I say, and they were spread, about 80 percent of them, outside ofthe country, in developing countries, because our mission was to helpdeveloping countries with aid programs—not the power plants, buildingschools or bridges; it was more the soft training programs—irrigation plans,economic advice. I got Paul Volcker to go to China for only $10,000. He had just been head ofour Fed, and he agreed to go over and talk to the Chinese government about—[laughs] I think they’re benefiting today from his advice—about strengtheningtheir economic moves. We helped every developing country—communist, socialist, capitalist. Wenever could argue about their politics. The amount of money that we spent ineach country depended on the poverty level of the country and the population,as a formula. China and India would’ve taken most of the money, so theywere truncated; but all the other countries were under that formula. They wereless than that. Even though China and India were the two biggest programs wehad, they didn’t scoop up all the money. But we didn’t give cash to any of the countries—like the Export-Import Bank.We bought projects and programs by hiring specialists to do various projectsthat were agreed to between our resident representative. We tried to have aresident representative in every country, and then he would have a staff that would then come up with some programs that would be good for thegovernment. The government would say, well, we don’t like this onebecause—like my good friend Fidel Castro would not like to have ademocracy program in Cuba. But on the other hand, he might suggest havingsome education project that his brother-in-law was running, and we wouldn’tlike that. So there’s a negotiation going on at the local level. Then the residentrepresentative proposes some projects up to the central management in NewYork. We had 20 percent of our people in New York; 80 percent were indeveloping countries, unlike the World Bank. The World Bank has it just theother way. Eighty percent of their people are in Washington, D.C. So we felt itwas a well-dispersed organization, but quite a management challenge.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I can imagine! Draper: Yes, because we had over a hundred different nationalities working in ourorganization.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right, and then you were supposed to be organizing, administering theagencies within the UN. It seems an impossibly large job. Draper: Not organizing—but overseeing. That was more of a coordination andco[operation job]. Yes, it was a big job. [laughs] It was a good job.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But you found it doable? Draper: Yes. It worked. The UNDP had a great reputation for honesty andstraightforward management, good management. It was not the diplomaticside of the UN, which of course is the most important part of the UN, Isuppose I’d have to say that. So nothing to do with the General Assembly orthe Security Council. Except [laughs] when politics came in—which it didonce in a while—to our projects. But mostly, we were a workaday kind of a—trying to get good solid aid programs from an international source, which wasvery important. Lots of countries didn’t want to do business with USAID. Bythe way, then the Russians and the Americans were at loggerheads, but it wassoftening. As I got there longer and longer, I went there in 1986 and you knowthe [Berlin] wall came down in 1990, I think, or 1989. So it was a veryexciting time, because there was a lot to do with Russia. I was the highestranking American, of course, in the UN. So therefore, when I went, I wouldbe welcomed on two levels: one, as an American who had the ear of PresidentBush, and also as the head of this large UN organization. So it was a very exhilarating job. There were lots of stories I could tell you about it, but I don’twant to bore you.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was there any kind of reporting arrangement that you had with the secretarygeneral? Draper: Yes, I reported to the secretary general. He was a very mild mannered man.Then he was replaced, while I was there, by Boutros Boutros-Ghali, who was[laughs] exactly the opposite. He had been, for twenty-five years, the ministerof state for Egypt, and so he was a sophisticated, but a tough, rather arrogant,rather megalomaniac personality.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was he interfering with what you were doing? Draper: No. Once in a while he had a different opinion or he’d have an opinion onsomething that my people on the ground felt that wasn’t going to work. Yes, Ihad a few altercations with him, but not much. I got along pretty much withboth of them, in different ways. But they were totally different personalities.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why did you leave the UNDP? Draper: Well, I was there for seven years, and I got reelected. You see, you’reproposed by your government, like the US government proposed me. But Iwas nominated by the Secretary General and elected by the GeneralAssembly. It sounds complicated, but the truth is at that time, it was always anAmerican that had that job, because it involved a good bit of money raising. Iwent around with a tin cup to the capitals of the rich countries and raisemoney. It didn’t come out of the UN budget. It was zero budgeting. You startfrom ground zero on the first day of the year, and you’ve got to raise themoney that you spend. So I raised about a billion and a half dollars, and thatwas a lot of money in those days.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And was it for specific programs? Draper: Yes, well, we designed those programs. But each year—it was a rolling thing.So we already had commitments out there. We had funds to keep thosehealthy, but every year we had to raise new funding to be sure that we couldgo out the sixth year. Usually it’s a five year—well, a lot of them vary, butfive-year programs were not unusual. Yes, so that was a fun part too, becauseI’d go to meet with some of the really neat people in Norway, meet with thepresident of Sweden. He had a meeting with me, and he said, “You know, thismorning I was walking around the park, and I was trying to think of your title,” which was administrator, at that time—minister and CEO, butadministrator was the same thing they use for the USAID today.Administrator rather than president, because you’re administrating an aidprogram. So he said, “I was trying to think, and the only thing I could think ofwas executioner.” [laughter] He was a great—but they welcomed you. As Isaid, I went sort of in two ways. So when I got to these capitals, I was reallyvery warmly welcomed. The UN was in a much stronger position, from a public relations standpoint,in those days. The goodwill for the UN was much greater, because thingswere going on between Russia and ourselves that were warming and the UNwas being used for some of those connections and information trading and allthat. And [Thomas R.] Pickering was a great ambassador to the UN. He wasthe US ambassador to the UN at that time. He was a great guy. So everythingwas great. I just felt good about the UN, I felt great about the job, I had a goodrelationship with—I could go into the Oval Office and talk with George Bush,which I did a number of times. Draper: I raised more money than anybody had ever raised for the program. We hadvery interesting programs. I had a private sector point of view, which I tried toimpress on the whole organization, to try and encourage our money to be usedto leverage a private activity or private enterprise or include the privateenterprise sector, the entrepreneurial efforts and so on. I took a friend of mine,Pitch Johnson, over to Romania and Poland and Hungary or something—afew countries, Bulgaria, maybe—to be the expert to help train classes onentrepreneurship. A lot of these CIS, they were called, Commonwealth of—[Independent States]—a spin off from Russia, these countries that were allpart of the Soviet Union, then they were splitting off. So I opened about eightor twelve offices that ringed around Russia, so I went to places likeAzerbaijan, Uzbekistan and Kyrgyzstan and—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Tajikistan and— Draper: I didn’t go there, but I did go to a lot of them. We opened an office in each ofthose, and many that I didn’t go to. It was all happening at that time becausethe Soviet Union was breaking up, and we had to have people to help. Well,they didn’t know anything about private sector. So you wanted somebody totrain them on what entrepreneurship, private sector is all about. They had noidea, in many cases. And of course, we worked directly with Russia in someof those things, even though they weren’t considered a developing country. Soit was a very good time to be there and a very exciting job.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Sounds that way. I only have about ten minutes more. Should we start onDraper International? That’s the next step.  Draper: We can, sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So I guess the question is, why did you leave the UN? And why back toventure capital? Draper: Okay. Seven years into it, reelected, after five years. So you have that feelingthat they want you, [laughs] which is nice. It didn’t happen to my successor.Or my predecessor. Anyway, I felt good about everything there, but I felt weshould come back home. Phyllis was there with me in New York all this time,and she was having a whirlwind experience, because we were very activesocially, too, when I was there and even when I wasn’t there. Sometimesshe’d come with me on some of these trips to Africa. She was a great help, inlots of ways. I paid her way; it didn’t go on the UN budget. I flew, by the way,business class. That was the tradition. Everybody but the secretary generalflies business class, which is a good sign that—. It was time for us to come back to California. She knew in Washington thatshe had gotten this damn disease, and so she needed time. It was time to comeback. So that’s what we did. She has Parkinson’s. For me, it was time to comeback, too because my learning curve was flattening out, my impact on theorganization was probably getting to be less and less important. We started awhole private sector division that emphasized activity, trying to encourageprivate sector activity in the various developing countries. It was good toleave. I could’ve stayed through the next term; probably could’ve stayed for along time, because they tend to reelect the devil they know, rather than thedevil they don’t. So I came back here and watched the grass grow for about a week. [<|endoftext|>
Interviewerlaughs] But I knew what I wanted to do, that I wanted to start a venture capitalfund company focused on an international country. Because of all myinternational activity, it was a natural for me to get going in the—and most ofthem did not have any venture capital.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, did you ever consider doing something other than venture capital? Draper: No. It was the only business I knew [chuckles]. I was comfortable with it, andso I never thought of doing anything else. I always loved venture capital. Thatwas not a problem. I never considered moving out of it. But I thought, gee,these countries I’d go to visit, they didn’t know anything about it. They didn’tknow what the term meant. It hadn’t hit. This is 1994, and so I told a friend ofmine what I wanted to do, Bill [William E.] McGlashan. And he said, “Well,why don’t you come over tonight?” (I mentioned that I wanted to look atPeruvian investments with a friend of mine who is Peruvian, not necessarily venture capital, but some kinds of investing down there in Peru.) [Bill said,] “Imet this woman [Robin Richards] who’s a second-year student at StanfordBusiness School, in Czech Republic, and I’d like you to come tonight becauseshe’s going to wrap up. This will be the second and last, or third and lastreport to me.” She had said, when I knew her in the summer in CzechRepublic, that she would like to study this and get a group of other studentsthat would help her, and could do a report and get credit for it in her secondyear. So I went to Stanford with him, and the five students gave a report. Shedidn’t really say very much, but I met Robin Richards. I didn’t think muchmore about it, except it was an interesting evening.Then I had put in a fax machine. If you work for one of these largeorganizations, big bureaucracies, you don’t do anything practical. [laughs] Sogoing off to an OfficeMax, or wherever I went, and buying a fax machine, andeven just plugging it in, it was kind of a big deal for me. [<|endoftext|>
Interviewer laughs] I gotit plugged in, and almost as soon as it was plugged in, her fax comes into me.I must’ve given her the number or something. It said, “I’d like to talk to youabout venture capital.” So we met at Il Fornaio that next Saturday morning,and I told her what I wanted to do, this international venture capital. She wasPhi Beta Kappa from the University of North Carolina, and from Atlanta. Soshe said, “I work for the vice president of Coca Cola. [I’d like] to do someventure capital for him. I was overseas. So this is exactly what I’d like to do.”So I said, “I think this thing’s going to work. [laughs] I just think you mightbe right for me, and I might be right for you.” In other words, I knew venturecapital out here, I knew the connections to the [Silicon] valley. She had thisyouth and energy, and connections of a younger [person]—most of theentrepreneurs that you back were closer to her age than mine, right? So at the end of three hours at Il Fornaio, that breakfast, we were partners. Sheknew what percentage of the company she was going to have. We didn’t knowwhat country we were going to, but I knew I wanted to go to Asia, and sheagreed. Maybe you need to go now, so why don’t we call it off and start up there.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, well, we got it started anyway, didn’t we?[End of Interview] <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You probably need to be reminded of where we stopped last time. We hadbarely begun to talk about Draper Richards. We didn’t yet talk about DraperInternational, which actually came a little earlier, did it not? Draper: Yes, Draper International came first.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, do you want to start with Draper International then? Draper: Sure, sure, sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You came back from the UN Development Program. Draper: Seven years of a wonderful part of my life. It is one of the great organizations.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. So you came back to California. And then what? Draper: So then I met Robin, and over breakfast we agreed to start a new venture firm.She was still a second-year student at Stanford Business School; southern gal,from Atlanta, a Phi Beta Kappa from the University of North Carolina. Shewas perfect because she had the youth and energy and connections. While ourplan was to go to Asia, we didn’t know which country we’d go to. But shewas perfect because she had connections with some of the young people outof Stanford and was able to identify with others of the same age, and youngpeople are what it’s typically about. Our program was to be an across-borderfund, so that we might start a company in the United States—the headquarterswould be in the United States, but all the money would be going into researchand so on in India, and then maybe the marketing effort was back in theUnited States, that kind of thing.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was it just India? Draper: I knew I wanted to go to Asia, and she agreed with that. She had livedoverseas a bit, had had a little bit of venture capital before going to Stanford,with the vice president of Coca-Cola, who had a personal fund in venturecapital. 70 So I thought, well, we’d better sort it out, and we looked into China, Vietnam,India, Indonesia, even Hong Kong. We decided on India because we wanted abig, complicated country. They spoke English. That was big time, because ifyou’re making an investment in a private company as a minority investor, youwant to be darn sure you understand what they’re saying. So English wasreally important, but English also helped them get a jump on the softwarebusiness. So they were leaders, over China and other countries, in computersoftware, because the language was helpful in that respect. They had ademocracy, rule of law, and that, to me, was very important, having seen somecountries, many countries, who were dictatorships, where the law didn’t meananything. I knew that in China, you might have a five-year contract with somebody, andat the end of three years, they say, “Well, it doesn’t work for me anymore,”and they just walk away. And that’s the way it works. Now, I didn’t want tohave that kind of a experience. But China was the one that was the mostlikely, other than India. Although Indonesia seemed like a good place at thetime, it had some of those same problems of a lack of democracy, and it justdidn’t seem to have the technology expertise in the country. You see, India had five at that time, I think now they’ve got seven, institutesof technology—Indian Institute of Technology, they call them. They’vetypically been sponsored by different countries—like Germany sponsoredone, and I think the United States sponsored one, Britain sponsored one.Hundreds of thousands of men and women apply, and they select about 1,200a year for each of the seven, so it’s much more selective than Yale, Harvard,Princeton, Stanford, in that they’ve got such a wave of people, all of whomknow how great this education is. So they had a good education system forundergraduate. We have a much better graduate program, so they come overhere pretty well trained, technically. So this was a big bonanza for us, to havea country that had a democracy, rule of law, spoke our language, and had thetechnology training in some very sophisticated stuff. Now, the question was a mushy, awkward, sluggish democracy, right? It’s thelargest democracy in the world. Well, it’s the largest democracy in the world,but it’s one of the youngest—it’s 1947 when they became a democracy, and ithad been a socialist country for so many years. Now, I happened to know,through my UN connections, a man named Manmohan Singh. ManmohanSingh had been finance minister for two years, before we went there, and sothe first call we made was to Manmohan Singh, who was then financeminister. Prior to that, several years before, he had been head of the CentralBank [of India]. But he was making some changes and the country was reallybeginning to catch hold. In fact, I had met him in Leeds Castle, in Kent,England, which was Anne Boleyn’s palace. We had a dinner there. We bothbelonged to something called the Tidewater Group. It was a group ofinternationalists who got together every year in a different country, andEngland was our host that year. It was a very erudite group. It was the head of UNDP, the head of UNICEF, but also the finance minister of Turkey orKuwait or China could be [invited]. Singh had been the head of the CentralBank of India, so he was a member for that reason, but he was between jobs. Everybody in the morning, following the dinner, had talked about making jobsin these developing countries, but I hadn’t said anything and he hadn’t saidanything. In the afternoon, I spoke up and said, “Everybody’s talking aboutjobs and nobody’s mentioned the private sector. All they talk about is how thegovernment can do this and the government can do that. My idea is push theprivate sector and everything else will come together.” He came up after thatand said, “We in India believe in the mixed economy. The private sector’s allright, but also government.” What it meant was socialism, and he was asocialist. Still is a socialist. But he also is a very bright man, who saw whatwas happening in the rest of the world, where capitalism was really takingroot. So in his two years as finance minister, after this meeting, he made a lotof changes. He opened up the economy. Starting with Gandhi, it was, let’s keep India for the Indians and keepeverybody else out. Let’s grow our own wool, cotton for own clothes, and doit all ourselves—so keep everybody else out. That really, for forty years—thefamily of [Jawaharlal] Nehru, who came later, and then Indira Gandhi, who’sno relation to Mahatma Gandhi—but for forty years, that family kept India asocialist country, and we in the United States backed Pakistan. So India, in aknee jerk way, went to the Soviet Union. So anyway, things were changing in India. I knew that it was changing a littlebit, although it was early days, two years into it, with Manmohan Singh at thefinance helm. I took Robin in to meet this delightful, warm, very brilliant, butvery soft-appearing man, in his blue turban. I shook hands with him andcongratulated him on being finance minister and doing so well, “Well, as amatter of fact, congratulations on taking all of the advice that I gave you inLeeds Castle.” He laughed, because I had told him, “Mixed economy’s fine,having some government and some private sector, but get the government tobe a few percent and the rest of it the private sector.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And was that what he was moving towards? Draper: He was moving toward open doors, no tariffs, open economy, andencouraging the private sector and tamping down the power and the controlsystem and all the certificates. Every businessman in Bangalore had to go toDelhi to get a permit to go into business, if he wanted to start a new business.And then everybody has their hand out, so there’s a lot of corruption, and stillis, around Delhi. But anyway, that was our only touch with the government.Our ambassador gave us a nice party and we announced, “We’re startingDraper International in Bombay and Bangalore.”  We hired two young people, Indians, to be the feet on the street and tee upsome deals for Robin and me to see them, and then Robin and I went aboutfour times a year to India. We would spend a couple of weeks there and we’dgo through all the deals that they had been able to uncover. And we being thefirst, the very first foreign venture capital company to come into India—atleast the first American one—there might have been a British one, but theynever knew what it really meant, it was a commonwealth fund, I think. So ourname was pretty well known very fast, because here was some excitingstuff—venture capital, which was hardly known what it meant. But it wascoming to India, and we had a very good reception there.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was the finance minister a key to all of this? Draper: He was. Today Manmohan Singh is prime minister of India and doing verywell without my advice.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I’ve been very aware of how you use a social network over the years. Youhave connections here, connections there. I’m imagining that that was lesstrue in India. Draper: Oh, it didn’t help us in our deal making. We made twenty-five investments inIndia, or as I say, cross border, and we did not need government help. In fact,we avoided Delhi. That was the last time we went, I think, although we visitedIndia over 20 times. We definitely wanted to just focus on the business. Butwhat he was doing was opening up the economy, so that an entrepreneur couldstart a business without going to pay some bureaucrat to go into business.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you didn’t have to handle that part of it, because I’m just thinking thatthere must’ve been some barriers in a foreign country to trying to operate asyou normally operate. Draper: To what?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You wouldn’t have had the infrastructure in India, that you were used tohaving in this country— Draper: No, that’s true.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: —where you’d been operating for decades. And was that a barrier in any way?  Draper: Well, no. The biggest barrier was they still had this very bureaucratic way ofwriting agreements, and lawyers there drew up documents in a confusing way.So when we finally closed the deal, the Indian form is for everybody to haveto initial every page, and then you couldn’t copy that page; you had to haveoriginals! So I must’ve signed my initials 2,000 times, before we could evengo into business. But he was changing that part of it, so Manmohan Singh wasimportant to us because he was opening up the Indian economy. So ourinvestments did a lot better because of him—but no government involvement.None of our companies had anything to do with the government.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. And all these were Indian companies? Draper: Well, no, some of them were American corporations, but we would hire theteam, have offices in Bangalore, and do the technology, sort of offshoretechnology, and then bring the product back maybe to sell around the world.But no—we had a really wonderful experience. The Indians are very creative.Of course, there are so many of them, that if you’re dealing with the brightestand the best—many of these were IIT graduates—you are getting very brightpeople, and they were just looking for a better life. Venture capital was new tothem. It was a big help. They couldn’t believe it. They usually thought thefamily had to have the business. They had to keep it small because of thesocialist problem—you can’t get too big without going through a lot ofpayoffs and all that. Singh did away with a lot of that. Now, our team over there was very good at rounding up and sorting out, andone of them had worked at ICICI, which is a quasi bank. His name was KiranNadkarni. Abhay Havalder came from Hewlett-Packard HCL, HP-HCL.ICICI is like a bank, and Kiran knew where a lot of bodies were buried. So weavoided dishonest people, thanks to him. In one of our investments, I think wegot ripped off. I had put together, in order to get this started, an investmentadvisory team for the partnership of Indians in India, one of them being RatanTata, who’s one of the famous industrialists in the country. He has that smallcar, that Indian car. He is a brilliant man, and again, one of the first people Itook Robin to see, because I knew him through the UN or the Export-ImportBank—or both, actually. I knew him in my international travels earlier. Ratanagreed to become an advisor to us, which didn’t hurt in getting our nameout—so that kind of thing. We got other people, not quite in his category, but other people that werehelpful to [us], one of whom said to me, “Don’t do that deal.” We lost about amillion dollars on an investment. It was in the movie production field. Hesaid, “Don’t do it,” and we should’ve taken his advice, but we didn’t, becausesomebody else that seemed to be very knowledgeable was going in with us.We both lost our money.  But all the rest seemed to do pretty darn well. They didn’t all make money,but some— All of them were technology deals except for one, which wasgoing to be like The Gap. We were going to brand our line. We would havepants and shirts made and sell them under brand names, a couple of differentbrands. That was a great idea, because up to that point, everybody in Indiawent to a tailor to have their pants made. They don’t wear jackets, particularlyin southern India, but basically, they don’t. They wear a tie, they wear a shirt,and they wear a pair of pants. So we went along with this. The company had very good management andwas going to make a lot of money, because people were beginning to shift tobuying their clothes off the rack. It was just turning; this is 1994. Instead ofgoing to a tailor to make it, they could find something that’s already made.They were all very smart, and everybody knows what was going on, so inIndia, the word traveled fast—and they had been in textiles, of course, all thehistory of India. The Silk Road runs through parts of China, but still, India isvery big in that kind of thing. So everybody else copied us very quickly. Wejust barely got our money out of that deal. But on balance, we did well. Wegot sixteen times the limited partners’ money back, in six years, which is verygood by any measure. It’s a very good return for venture capital, or any otherbusiness.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, when you started off with kind of a blank slate, how did you find thesetwenty-five companies? Draper: Well, that’s where these two Indian partners came in—that was their mission,to go find opportunities. When the word is out that there’s money here, bagsof money from these dumb foreigners, there’s a line-up [laughter]. So they gota good selection, and we were very lucky.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, it seems to me that you really needed these two guys. Draper: Oh, yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And had they ever had experience in venture capital before? Draper: The one that worked for the quasi bank ICICI, had, in effect, some privatebanking experience, but I wouldn’t call it venture capital like we did. Theterm wasn’t known, any more than it was when I first started in SiliconValley.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, how did they learn the ropes then?  Draper: Well, we coached them. And Kiran Nadkarni had enough financialexperience. He was a financial guy, so it didn’t take a lot of understanding tosaying, hey, we want good quality people. He knew about quality becausehe’d been a banker, basically. He had a warmth about him, people trusted him,and so that was good; he was able to sort it out. The other one, AbhayHavaldar, was more of a marketing guy, and a hands-on executive. Whenwe’d get into a company, he liked to get into the operations of it and help withtheir marketing and that kind of thing. He’s now a partner of a much biggerfund that came in later, called General Atlantic. They became a limited partnerof ours—the only institution we had. The other partners in our fund, which was not a big fund, but we had someindividuals—maybe eight Indians here in Silicon Valley that put some moneyinto the fund, say a quarter of a million or that kind of investment, and thensome friends of mine and my former partners at Sutter Hill. We had a nicegroup of maybe twenty or thirty partners—only one institution, GeneralAtlantic. General Atlantic wanted to get their feet wet. It’s a big fund, and thiswas a little investment, like an asterisk on their balance sheet, but they wantedto get their feet wet in India. Ultimately, when we decided not to go for a second fund—for personalreasons; Robin was raising babies, and I didn’t want to go to India four timesa year. So once we had gotten the partners sixteen times their money back, wedecided to declare victory and go home. [<|endoftext|>
Interviewer laughs] It was a chapter inmy life that was very exciting. I’ve invested myself in a couple of Indiancross-border funds, and I’m friends with lots of good Indians, whom I’vegotten to know through that experience. So it was a wonderful educationalexperience. Robin and I—we would work for five days, and then we’d taketwo days and go to some remote part of the country that we hadn’t been tobefore. We’ve actually been to many parts of India that many Indians have notgotten to, so we have a lot of experiences. As you can see around the office,we have pictures that she took. She has a very good Leica camera that shetook those pictures with, so we have a lot of wonderful memories about India.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So Draper International, just to clarify, was really this one fund. Draper: It was one fund, and it was focused only on India. We thought, well, we’re notgoing to try and take on the world; let’s do it right in one country—and wedid.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now, were you the first, or one of the first, to do venture capital long distancelike this?  Draper: We were the first one to go into India, I know. I imagine there were others thatdid something long distance, but not too many, and for good reason. ArthurRock, for example, says, “I don’t want to invest in anything I can’t drive toand get home at night.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: No, I’ve heard that too. So this seems a very different way of doing it. Draper: So this was a different thing. Yes, no question of that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now, does helping to building a company, as well as make money, drop out ofthe picture when you invest at such a distance? Because you can’t be there allthe time. Draper: I agree. But the partners that were there did the hands on. They acted on theboards when the headquarters was there. If the headquarters was here, wewould go on the board. So there were several that we did here that werehelping directly.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Some of the twenty-five companies were here? Draper: Yes. The headquarters was here, but we spent the money there. And we gotsome leverage with OPIC, Overseas Private Investment Company. If you askanybody at OPIC, they’ll tell you it’s the best fund they ever backed. But thatis a fund much like the SBIC program in Washington, where they want toencourage Americans to invest in developing countries, and so they will makea loan of two dollars for every dollar you invest. They’ll lend you two dollarsfor every dollar you invest in a developing country. We paid them back early.We had to pay them a pre-payment penalty in fact. They today say becausethey got 4 percent of the profits, they say ours was the best fund they ever had,and I’m sure that’s true.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And why were you paying a penalty? Draper: Well, because if somebody lends you money, they want a certain term.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You were cutting it short. Draper: We were cutting it short, and that was just written into the agreement. Wewere happy to pay them off because we were making money faster than wehad a right to, really. [laughs] We were lucky, let’s face it. We hit a great country for this kind of thing. Now there are scores of venture firms going toIndia. It’s really amazing.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you think you opened the floodgates? Draper: We did, yes, we did.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you ever have any bad moments, thinking: I’m not there right on thescene; do I really know what’s going on in these companies? Draper: Sure. But I was never afraid that my two partners wouldn’t tell me everythingthat they saw. We could always send Kiran in Bangalore to, let’s say, Madras,and get him to find out what was going on, if there was a problem. But everydeal didn’t go well. We lost money on probably half a dozen. We still haveone investment over there, and it’s a company we started in India. Theheadquarters is there. We have rupee stock. They went public on theNASDAQ exchange, and we can’t sell our stock until they go public on theBombay exchange, for certain Indian rules. I think if we’d known that, whenthey decided to go public on the NASDAQ, we would’ve said, find a way toget us out. But the company’s doing well. It’s the sort of Yahoo of India. It’s aportal, so-called, and doing really very well.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was there any pattern in terms of technologies for these twenty-fivecompanies? Was there a sector that you— Draper: It was almost all IT, information technology. So that’s India.Then as far as Draper Richards goes, Robin and I had opportunities to investin non-Indian situations, but our rules were that we didn’t want to take ourfocus off India, because we had other people’s money. Some call it OPM,[chuckles] Other People’s Money. We didn’t want to take our attention awayfrom that because we felt a fiduciary responsibility. So what we did was toform a small company that just had our own money. We didn’t put a lot ofmoney into it. We then started to make investments. Then we put a little moremoney in, and made more investments that were not in India. We would notgo on the board of any of them. In other words, we were more inactiveinvestors and had the approval of the other limited partners in the India fund.Just like you may have a job at Bancroft Library, but Bancroft wouldn’t see itas a conflict of interest if you did something for another library.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And why did you do this?  Draper: To make money! And that’s the long and the short of it—make money.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] And why not go on the board as well? Draper: Well, because we had these others who had put money behind us to focus onIndia, and we can just spread ourselves so thin. So we didn’t want to take a lotof time in board meetings with a local company.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. Now, all of this is happening under the rubric or the umbrella of DraperRichards? Draper: Well, there’re actually two operations. One is Draper Richards and one isDraper International. In Draper Richards, we’ve now added a partner, HowardHartenbaum, and so that’s a little different. But basically, the ownership isroughly the same.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So Draper International didn’t die with that first fund. Draper: No, it hasn’t, because we still have this one last remaining investment, acompany called Rediff. Any Indian knows about Rediff, because they cancheck the cricket scores and what’s playing in Bollywood. It’s a portal; it’sjust like Yahoo. You get a lot of action on it. It’s a search firm, it’s a searchbusiness. They have a search engine, like Google does. It’s not quite as goodas Google, but maybe one day.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And is it India focused? Or is it international? Draper: It’s only in India.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Okay, should we talk about Skype? Draper: Skype was a great company.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: We haven’t really followed an investment through a company. Would Skypebe a good one? Draper: Skype would be a good one, sure. The way Skype happened was I hiredHoward Hartenbaum. It was pretty crowded here for venture capital. There was a lot of money, and at the time I set up with him, there were not as manyopportunities as there was money chasing those opportunities.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You mean strictly the Bay Area? Draper: Here in Silicon Valley. So I asked Howard, whom I met because he hadhelped his brother run a company. I asked him to go over to Europe and lookaround Europe, because he loved to travel and his kids were young. Hemarried a Japanese gal. He lived in Japan for four years, worked for <|endoftext|>
Interviewer,and for one of the automobile companies at one time—MIT background, verybright, very energetic, a workaholic. And so he set up in Luxembourg, and he invested in four or five smallinvestments for me personally, and then Tim Draper said, “Why don’t you gotalk to the guys at Kazaa?” And Kazaa was a peer to peer connective systemthat delivered music, so that you could download music from somebody else.Of course, the music industry hated it, sued Kazaa; Kazaa went out ofbusiness. But the two founders of Kazaa, who had set up with sometechnology talent, went back to Sweden. Howard, instead of saying to Tim, “Kazaa’s gone, kaput,” and forgettingabout it, Howard had the brains and the energy to go up to Stockholm andlook up the two founders of Skype. One was a Swede, thirty-nine years old,and one was a Dane, twenty-nine years old. The Dane was very creative, andthe Swede was organized and strong in business management. Howard foundthese guys writing their business plan for Skype. So he said, “Well, let mehelp you write the business plan. I’ve run a company, my brother’s company.I’ll help you write the business plan.” And he did. “I’ll put some of Draper’smoney into this to start it up.” So I was in on the first round. I was the firstinvestor in Skype. There were a couple others, Europeans mostly, and thenHoward also invested.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now, were you investing mainly on Howard’s word? Draper: Pretty much, yes. Because he was doing a good job, as far as I could tell, and Ididn’t have time to go over before we invested, although I did later on. I waslooking after things here. So I let him decide. I didn’t go over and check outevery deal, because I didn’t have other people’s money that I was concernedabout, and I felt confident in this guy to do it right. I had helped him learn thebusiness. So then all of a sudden Skype started to take off, [laughs] and thenthey needed a bigger block of money. So we took it to Draper FisherJurvetson, since Tim had had a part in it. See, each of us had a part. I hiredHoward, Howard got direction from Tim and carried out the deal, so all threeof us were involved. Anyway, Draper Fisher Jurvetson put the bigger money 80in. Mine was a rather modest investment, but I got a thousand times mymoney back when we sold it to eBay for $2.5 billion. See, it only took, I don’tknow, something like $2.5 million, so it was a big hit.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: None of which you predicted. Draper: No, we couldn’t predict, but we knew the idea of peer to peer connection—to work over the Internet with no wires, and that we didn’t have to have aphone, we just needed to have a computer—was a great step forward incommunications. So everybody [who] had a computer, wanted to callsomebody else who had a computer, and that was the viral part of the thing.See, you live in London and I’m in the US, and I say, “Get on Skype. All youdo is sign up, and it’s free, and then I can have a free talk with you, and youwill benefit.” So that’s the viral part. In other words, so somebody else joinsSkype, and then they want to call somebody besides me, and they say, “Get onSkype. Sign up.” So pretty soon, this viral reaction sent the registered usersup—absolutely extraordinary growth. So before we knew it, we had 20million, 80 million. Now it’s something like 250 million people that are usingit. A lot of Indians and Chinese and others all over the world.Howard, after we made that investment, wanted to go back to the U.S. Hiskids were growing up; he wanted them to go to high school here. So I broughtHoward back to this office, because Robin had stopped coming in.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because of her children. Draper: She had four children in six years. So I said, “Why don’t you take her office?And let’s work here.” We, together, worked the Skype management, becausethey needed something in the US—some presence, some sales talent, some PRprograms. And so we really ended up levering up the power of Skype. Alltheir engineers are in Estonia, so it’s a very international deal. Theirheadquarters is in London; one’s from Denmark and one’s from Sweden;Estonia is where all the engineering talent is. Now they have outgrownEstonia because they ran out of engineers in Estonia. [laughs] They had about200 on the staff. It’s a wonderful, fast-moving story.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, both the stories that you told today, the Skype and the story about India,I’ve been struck at your willingness to put considerable trust in other people. Draper: In my partners.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes.  Draper: Well, part of my talent is finding, recognizing good talent, both in theentrepreneur and in my own partners—I pulled Pitch Johnson into thebusiness.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I know you did. Draper: And effectively got Paul Wythes trained in the business, and then got Robintrained in the business. They were all great, talented people—and nowHoward. They’re all really great people that just need to be given a little bit ofroom.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So can you sum up what you’re looking for when you’re sizing up a person? Draper: Well, for a venture capitalist, I think you want brain power and you wantenergy and you want personality. You want somebody who is going to attractpeople, because a good entrepreneur has more than one choice, typically, ofwhere he gets his venture capital. He’ll look at it as being his family, in a way.He’s not just looking for the money, if he’s good and smart. He’ll look for,what can you do for me? How can you help? And typically, he also isthinking, do I really want to work with this person on my board? Or am Igoing to be constantly answering nit-picking questions? Does this guy get thebig picture, or this gal get the big picture? Will I be comfortable? Will wehave a good time together? Because one of the things we stress whenever wetalk to entrepreneurs—we want to have fun! I have that feeling in the officehere—there are, I don’t know, ten people. We’ve got our foundation overhere, and we all mix it up. A big part of the idea of the office is we want tomake money, but we have fun before anything, almost. So the answer is those characteristics. It goes without saying you wantsomebody dead honest, and you want somebody that’s got really good ethics,and you want somebody who’s got a strong sense of pride in getting the jobdone. And then I didn’t mention the analytical side—just looked at a deal thismorning with Howard and a couple others. He’s got a very good idea, thisentrepreneur. He’s got a Caltech PhD and an MIT background. But I askedhim, “What happened at the company that you were at before, that you alsohad the creative idea to start? What are they going to say when I call thepresident of that company, whom you got as a CEO?” He says, “I like to startcompanies. I’ve got the creative genes and all that. But at a certain point, Iwant somebody else to run it.” So I said, “Well, what’s this CEO going tosay.” “Well, he’ll probably say we had something of a personality conflict.”So you’ve got to dig deep into that, because that’s going to be important—aleopard doesn’t change its spots.  So the analysis is not so much a paper analysis—although that’s important infiguring out what the market is and what your odds are of filling a need and allthat, what the size of the market is. All that’s important. But the heart of it istalking about the people with their bosses and people who have interactedwith them. If you call the boss and he says, “Well, I’d like to tell you all thisand this and this—.” Then you say, “Well, who else should I talk to abouthim?” Because that name was given to me, see. And then he says, “Well, talkto Sam.” Well, Sam says, “Bob couldn’t tell you this, but I will tell you thatthis guy is terrible in this respect.” But Bob, their wives are best friends orsomething. [laughs] Who knows? But the point is, you’ve got to do yourhomework on the people. That’s my attitude, that’s more important thananything. If you get a good person—sharp, talented, and has the leadershipskills, he or she is going to get you out of a problem with a bad product or aweak market. You’ll have better odds if things don’t go well. And in almostevery case, there are bumps along the way. I think Skype was an exception,until it merged with EBay. A lot of companies just need shaping. They get abump in the road and the leader falls apart, then you’ve got real problems andyou’ve got to solve those problems.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, and you do try to solve them, rather than dropping out? Draper: Sure. I’d say for the companies that we’re in, we do it wrong, almost all of usventure capitalists. We spend two-thirds of our time with companies that arenever going to make us much money. We may save the bucks that we’ve gotin it. We may get a double or something. But the one that is just taking off,potentially like a rocket, you kind of want to get out of the way and let themgo. On the other hand, there are ways you can help that company, and theleverage to help the really good ones would probably make you more moneythan the money you save by struggling day after day with problems of a sickcompany.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you have a rule of thumb, then, about how many deals you’re going to beinvolved in at a time? Draper: Yes, we probably have too many deals for the number of people that we’vegot. But we’ve brought in other people. I like to share. I always did. When Istarted Sutter Hill, I started it with the concept of sharing. Even though wemight have enough money to do the whole thing, we wanted to share becauseeach of us could bring different things to the table, contacts, marketknowledge or just plain wisdom—another venture capitalist, in other words,that’s reputable.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, another whole partnership.  Draper: Yes, so we would bring in others very happily—Sutter Hill and KleinerPerkins and Mayfield might do the deal together.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And Sutter Hill started that syndication idea? Draper: Well, yes, I would say we did. I would say we were very early anyway. But itwas a natural thing. For example, we had made an investment in PrimeComputer, and I went to see that investment in Boston. The vice president ofengineering came out to talk to me and he sat in the lobby with me and hesaid, “Well, confidentially, I want to start a new company.” So I said, “Well,why don’t you fly out and come to see us?” He flew out, and at lunch wemade the deal, because he was a brilliant guy, and we started a companycalled Apollo, which developed a big workstation computer. Eventually,Hewlett-Packard bought Apollo, and we made a big bundle of money on it.But I had taken it to Rockefellers, because I wanted somebody on the EastCoast to share it with us and do some work for them. And so thenRockefellers calls us with another deal and this kind of thing.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: This was a Sutter Hill deal. Draper: This was a Sutter Hill deal, yes.[End Audio File 7]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: We’re talking about technology without being too specific. We don’t need toget into all the technologies that you’ve invested in, because I’d be hereforever and you’d get bored. But where does your knowledge of thetechnology of the company you’re investing in enter into this whole mix ofthings that you’re considering? Draper: Right. I’m a history major from Yale University, so I’m not a technologist.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, we approve of that! [chuckling] Draper: Number one in the country, by the way. Not me, but Yale. I think you begin toget a feel for the terminology, the concepts, and some part of what ishappening in the technology, but I am the first to admit that I don’t understanda lot about the technology of the deals that we go into. But I use my—I usedto say Rolodex—but I use my friends and contacts extensively. Or if there’s somebody who’s a specialist in the field and I learn about it, I call that person.So I do that kind of research. Or I ask the entrepreneur to meet with so-and-so,who might be a specialist in that field, and then they give me feedback. Sothat’s the kind of high-level research that I do. [chuckling] That’s just not mystrength. There are people—and in fact, most—who want to get into venture capital—it’s a lot easier if you have a double-E degree, because most firms wantsomebody with a technical background. But a lot of the early days people hadfinancial backgrounds or something like that. Arthur Rock was an investmentbanker. Tommy Davis of Mayfield was a lawyer. It’s an interesting mix. I findthat some people, like Howard, Pitch Johnson and Paul Wythes, haveengineering backgrounds; but they never were engineers in the sense of filingfor patents or that kind of thing, so other aspects of their education came toplay. So they use some of that background, very helpfully, to understand whatthe entrepreneur’s talking about. I miss some of that, and Howard is my earson that one.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you think over the years, there has been a natural division of labor? Youobviously are very good at sizing up people and have a very strong intuitivesense, and then maybe some of the other people, like Paul Wythes, had astronger technical background. Draper: Paul is an example of a guy who’s a good sales personality, and I would sayhe’s not as geeky as Howard. Howard is a good salesman, too, but he isbrilliant technically. No company works well without a division of labor, asyou say. So there are all kinds of ways to do it in the entrepreneurial worldand the venture capital world. The answer is, you talk it over, you say, well,wait. What’s he doing? What are you doing? What should I be doing so wedon’t double up?Let me tell you of one early deal, just to describe how some of it works. Atarideveloped the game Pong, and a ball went back and forth on your televisionset, and you could play with those sticks. So these three guys came in and saidthat they wanted to make games for the computer—actually, for the Atarimechanism, not a computer. So I wasn’t so sure. So they said, “Well, take thishome with you.” I had a computer with tape on it. Not disks, but tape, oldfashioned, really old fashioned, which my wife bought for me from RadioShack. I got this bridge game, and it was great. The diamonds were red andthe clubs were black. I said to myself, God, this is fun. With the computer, Icould play bridge; we didn’t need four people, I just played by myself, and itwould deal me a hand and I’d play the hand. So I thought, this is the neatestthing! So we had to back it.  So we started this company called Activision—got to be a big company.These three guys were all very geeky game guys—GGG, geeky game guys.[<|endoftext|>
Interviewer laughs] And I said, “We need somebody to sort of manage theplace.” So there’s a good fellow named Jim Levy who came from, I think,Time Warner. Anyway, he came looking for a job, and so I introduced himand they got along fine, and so that was the team of four. So we launchedActivision, and Sutter Hill made a lot of money on it and felt very good aboutit, and everybody felt good about it. The team grew and a division of laborwas essential. As an aside, I educated myself on Activision. I said, “I could probably dosomething with this computer beside play games.” So we had a Valentine’sparty at my house, and I said, “I’m going to program this so that they’ll cometo the party and they will be assigned to their dinner partner, depending onhow they answer these three questions.” So I was having a lot of fun with this.I got this whole program all set, and the party was, let’s say, a couple of daysaway, and my wife said, “Now, come on, leave your computer.” I’d been thereall morning, half the afternoon. “Come on, leave your computer and let’s gofor a walk.” So I said, “Perfect, because I’m just at the perfect point.” I pusheda button and I erased everything that I had on there. Oh, my God! [laughter] So I went on the walk, and then I came back and I had to redo it. But I learnedsomething so that’s called programming. I really did do a little programming,but I couldn’t do it today.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And you were figuring that out on your own? Draper: Yes, but [laughs] you have an instruction book at that point. Computers werevery different. It was a tape thing with reel to reel, the tape would break andyou’d have all kinds of problems. But I was trying to learn something aboutthe business that I was in. Basically, it was rudimentary, a research thing. No,I could not do any programming today.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Once you’ve invested the money and you’re trying to get this company off theground and working in a way that you think is going to be efficient andprofitable, what are you doing to actually build this company? If it’s easier topick a specific company, that’s fine, too. Draper: Right. I can give you two examples. One, I was on vacation in Chicago and Icalled on a friend of mine, and he said, “Look up Dave Bossen when you getback to the West Coast.” Dave was a very accomplished management guy outof the Middle West, in a company that made a product that sensed thethickness and moisture content of paper in motion. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, yes, you talked about it. Measurex. Draper: So he was accomplished manager. And so backing him, what I did for himwas to help him find some people at Stanford who had some technologybackground to build the product. I also remember saying to him in a boardmeeting, “Hey, you maybe ought to spend more on getting the service portionof the business going, and make that a profit center. Or he was running out ofmoney and you know he’s got a great product, a great team, everything’sgoing well, but he just needed more money. So we introduced him to someother people that would put in follow-on money. That’s the kind of thing thatyou do for an accomplished manager who knows what he’s doing. He sets itup, you go there, you feel very comfortable. You’re sitting in good officeswhere the things are going right; he takes you down to the plant, you see whathe’s building; and you meet his team and they’re all professionals. That’s onekind. Another is a guy I may have mentioned. Pitch and I started a company calledElectroglas, and they made a diffusion furnace for the semiconductor industry.This is a guy who learned how to do that at Fairchild. He came out and heknew how to put that product together, but he didn’t know beans aboutrunning a company. So we matched him up with Chuck Gravelle, a fellowwho’d, of all things, run the marketing for a boat company in Minnesota, hehad to leave because he made so much money by putting one ad in Lifemagazine that said, “If you want to have a franchise, send us an order for oneboat.” And all of a sudden this little company in Minnesota blossomed. Heblew the entire budget that the president of the company had given him on thisone ad. And it worked. So he came out here looking for a job. He didn’t knowanything about electronics or anything technological. So we pieced themtogether, and we liked Gravelle. We liked him very much, and the other guynamed Arthur Lash, he was fine with it because he really just wanted to do thetechnical stuff. Chuck was the CEO and a great marketing guy and they builtthe company together. But in the beginning, we were running out of money and we got down toabout six people in the company. It was a question of whether we kept thestock boy or not and had a board meeting [laughs] to try and decide how deepwe’re going to cut. Pitch and I were actively sweating over that deal to try andget it to run, because we didn’t, in those days, have another way to go to otherpeople to get more money. We had put so much money in and we were unableto do more. Both of us spent a lot of time just moaning through the variousproblems and questions and getting this little team to start. Then all of asudden it takes off, and then you spend less time and you go to the boardmeeting once a month and you’re briefed and you really know things are ingood hands. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So the time sinks, as you said before, are the companies that are not taking off. Draper: Yes, that’s usually it but our time spent on Electroglas paid off. Now, I got acall from another venture capitalist a week ago, two weeks ago. He said, “Canyou come to the city, San Francisco, to meet with this team of three whobasically are pulling a mutiny on the CEO? And they say it’s either him orus.” So this is Saturday morning, and I said sure. So the two of us sat withthese guys all morning, as they told us all the bad things that the CEO wasdoing, even though he had had a good record at the place he came from. Iwon’t go into the names of this, but—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But did you agree that they were right? Draper: So we did. In the final analysis, we wanted to do it quickly, so the next weekwe fired the CEO. He’s still on the board. He’s still a friend—I think. But wewere faced with this; what do we do? You’ve got to be able to get theconfidence of the people you’re working with if you’re the leader. So we’llsee how that goes. We don’t know how that’s going to go.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, but you have to be willing, it sounds to me, to make some very harddecisions every once in a while. Draper: Oh, yes. Sure. The biggest problem, typically, is that you don’t move fastenough. You say, “Geez, we should’ve made that change so long ago! Weknew he wasn’t right, but we kept giving him the benefit of the doubt. Themoney kept drifting out the door and—.” Now, they have a phrase—you’reburning so much money. I hate that term, because you want them to beinvesting, not burning the money. “What’s your monthly burn rate?” Venturecapitalists all over say the same thing. They shouldn’t really, because [laughs]it sounds like, well, I’m burning $400,000 this month; I think maybe$300[,000] next month, if we cut way back.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You don’t like it because it sounds like wasted money. Draper: Correct. You want to say how much are you spending. You are losing money,so that the point is there’s no revenue. But how much are your expenses goingto be this month? That’s what we used to say in the old days. This burn moneyis a term that has come in since Wall Street took over Silicon Valley. A lot ofWall Street money has come out here. There’s a lot of wrestling with personnel issues. We spend some time on howmany options each should get and that kind of thing, after you’ve structured the deal. But then you find out some perform brilliantly; or somebody quits,and you’ve got to get somebody else in. Then there often is restructuring. There was another case where there were a group of Indians, and a very finewoman came in as the CEO, Hewlett-Packard background and all. She did agreat job of straightening up the look of the place and the organized feel to it.But then they got to the point where they weren’t closing sales. Again, I don’twant to go into the details of what company, but they weren’t closing deals.She wasn’t closing, the marketing team, which was pretty good—onemarketing [person] was not an Indian, but the others were. You had thefeeling, well, there’s kind of a cultural thing that she’s having problems with. But eventually, we needed new funding, so we got two new venture firms tocome in, and we all together made the decision that she wasn’t right. Shehadn’t gone out to close sales as president and that was needed without havingthe HP brand. She didn’t know the customers. She was good on organizationwithin the inside walls of the company, but not a driving force in the market.So we changed managements there, in that situation. So you have thatproblem. With a good management in place, they usually use us for contacts.Do you know somebody in Hewlett-Packard, or in Google that we can talk to?Or somebody at Wells Fargo? And we often do. Yes, I know the CEO ofWells Fargo, and Chevron, and the management wants to get in there to get agood appointment for some sales reason. Good management makes good useof venture capitalists and their contacts. I have this crazy deal called Prolacta [Bioscience], that’s kind of trying to dowhat the Baxter company does. Baxter gets blood from the Red Cross andbottles it in plasma form and sells it to the hospitals. Women used to give milkto milk banks, and it was used for babies that had mothers that didn’t haveenough milk. It was a big thing fifty years ago, twenty years ago, even. Theyclosed up, most of them, because HIV/AIDS came in, and mothers didn’twant any other woman’s milk for her baby. So then we figured out that what we could do is, in a sense, pasteurize or cleanup the milk. So we built a factory in Los Angeles, and the idea was to gatherthe mother’s milk from those who were willing to give their milk to helpbabies in a neonatal situation where they’re getting Nestlé’s formula. Nestlé’sgives the milk away. It’s a little bit of a problem, because we’re selling ours.But any kind of small baby, pound-and-a-half, needs very delicate feeding.Just intuitively, you can see that mother’s milk is a lot better. Doctors agreewith this, but there’s a big bureaucracy in every hospital and decisions of thiskind take forever to make. Anyway, we backed this company, started it up, called Prolacta. It wentthrough all kinds of problems. The first problem was that I backed thisvisionary woman who had started a breast pump company and she had theidea of this one, too. Her partner was a guy who I thought was pretty solid, but he turns out to be a little weak on judgment. He wanted to get a phone into theoffice and the connection had to go through another office, but the phonepeople were coming there on a Saturday. So he broke into their office. Well,of course, the police and everything. She is the CEO, so she says, “Well, Ifired him.” Well, I thought, oh, my God! He was the business management ofthis embryo of a company. So I’m flying down there and we have nomanagement. Then I contacted a guy who I had worked with in another venture and askedhim to help. He went down there for weeks at a time. Then one day she says,“Well, I fired him.” And I had faith in him. More problems. We needed moremoney. It helps, actually, when that happens. We were able to makemanagement changes. And we got a CEO from Baxter, and that’s workingwell. Before we got that solved, the woman that had given us great advice aboutthese milk banks that she’d helped organize getting the milk in, well, she andthis visionary woman had a cat fight and, “I never want to talk to her again.”Then we found that women were not coming right forward with their extramilk. “Oh, it’s for a company making money. There’s something wrong withthat.” Then two women who had the idea of doing this on the Internet, andthey call themselves “Two Maids a-Milking,” saved us on the quantity. Nowmonths. We have the whole supply system organized over the Internet. But the next problem was that the hospitals were not really just jumping at it.They want to see tests. They want to make sure it’s safe and better.Meanwhile, we’ve saved lives of a lot of little kids in various incidents andexperimental use, where they have no other choice, and the baby’s dyingbecause it’s got some kind of a problem in his stomach and needs mother’smilk. So anyway, there’s this company called Prolacta, down in southernCalifornia. I don’t know if they’ll make it or not, but I brought some of mygood friends into it. I felt more pain because I had these good friends in and Iworried whether we’re going to pull this company out. Then we got a very fine venture capitalist here in the city to come in, whoknows a lot about the general field of selling to hospitals, and so on. I wastelling this story and all the background to the [Ewing Marion] KauffmanFoundation which helps get more venture capitalists into the system, becausethe guy who founded it thought that more venture capital would be good forentrepreneurship. Good idea, Kauffman Foundation. If a venture capitalcompany will hire them, they’ll pay half the salary or something. It’s that kindof thing. Every year they have a class of these young men and women andthey all meet.So I went to talk with them and I gave a little description of Prolacta, all theproblems we were having with this thing. Turns out that one of the men in the 90audience had joined the venture firm that had just brought $10 million into thecompany! [laughter] And he said, “Geez, we didn’t know there were all thoseproblems with it.” I had been saying how bad it was and how lucky they werethat we got the problems solved, because the new management is very good.So management’s really important. You are hit with surprises quite often inthat regard. The coup that I described earlier—that was a total surprise. We thoughteverybody was getting along like gangbusters in the company. It seemed to bedoing very well, and everything was rosy until we learned what was reallygoing on. But you’ve got to be empathetic, because these entrepreneurs are theones that are making the money for you. They’re the ones that are doing thework. You’ve got to be very empathetic to their problems when they tell youthat things are going astray—“you’ve got to do something about this, you’vegot to help me with this.” You think, well, gee, they ought to be solving theirown problems. The divorce rate is higher than any other profession that Iknow, because they’re working fifteen hours a day sometimes, and their wifenever sees them, and wonders— It’s very difficult. There’s a lot of tension instarting up a company. There are a lot of personality problems that theentrepreneur has got to adjust to. Some can do that well and others, who areused to working for a big company in a high-tech field, perhaps don’t havethat human characteristic of flexibility in working with other people. There arelots of reasons that the entrepreneur is under tremendous pressure, so youhave to be very sensitive to those needs. When I say the entrepreneur, itwouldn’t just be the CEO, but I’m [also] talking about the VP of marketingand the rest of the top team—VP of engineering et al.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do most entrepreneurs expect management expertise from the venturecapitalist, as well as money? Draper: Yes, I think the best entrepreneurs will sort out who the venture capitalcommunity is and who the best in it are for their particular situation. So thereare a couple of aspects to that. The best entrepreneurs will interview severalventure capitalists and make a selection. One example of that is Bill Gatescame down to talk to us when he was looking for$1 or $2 million forMicrosoft. We wanted to do the deal very much. There was no question aboutwhat the price was; he had set that price. He was interviewing, and heinterviewed us and he interviewed two other firms.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now, was this early in the game? Draper: Oh, yes. Otherwise, he wouldn’t worry about $1 or $2 million. This was veryearly in the game. But there was a man who is now at August Capital, whohad worked for us for one summer in Sutter Hill. God! The big mistake was we didn’t offer him the moon to stay with us. Instead, we hardly noticed him.He was putting our computer system together in the summer, and also doing aproject for one of our companies, and I didn’t see much of him myself. DaveMarquardt is his name. He’s now a very good venture capital[ist]. He hadroomed with [Steven A.] Ballmer, the partner of Bill Gates. So whenMarquardt joined Burt McMurtry’s firm they got the inside track. That was avery good hire. Because that’s the one they went with, but we made a pitchand we were excited about making the investment. Gates was twenty-nineyears old. He’s a pretty amazing guy. I have watched his career as he marcheson to become the richest man in the world.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But may I ask a question, though, about? Are you saying, then, that even attwenty-nine, Bill Gates was really savvy and looking you over? Draper: Yes, absolutely. Gates was confirming the quality of Marquardt’s firm. Wedidn’t look that much better. It was kind of a check on them. That was it. Welooked about like them, so we lost a big fish. Another story of the big fish that got away: I hired a guy named Len Baker, atSutter Hill. He is still there as a partner. He’s a very good venture capitalist. Itold you earlier that we had taken Apollo to Rockefeller. They were payingme back, and they called me about Apple Computer—Peter Crisp was thepartner. They weren’t even called Venrock then, they were called theRockefellers. He called and said, “We have this deal called Apple Computer.”And I said, “Great.” “We’ve got a million dollars which we have not placed.”Let’s say it’s a $4 million deal or something like that. “And we’re going to putin two and Art [Arthur] Rock’s going to put in one. Do you want to invest?”Wow, that sounds great. So I made a big mistake. I sent Len Baker, who had just been with us aboutthree months, down to look at it. Len came back and he said, “Well, the guykept me waiting about a half-hour. Then I met him, and he’s very arrogant,and it’s a $19 million value.” The valuation was $19 million. So I said,“Len—” I was trying to train him—what a stupid thing, to train him on a dealthat the Rockefellers sent me [chuckling]. I said, “Well, okay, if you don’tthink it’s the right thing to do, we won’t do it.” Boy, oh boy, what a mistakethat was! Of course, that was Steve Jobs, who is so good that he has a lot to bearrogant about. He’s the only guy that I know that ran two public companiesat once, Pixar and Apple—was fired from Apple at one point and called backin because they were screwing up so badly.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, Mr. Draper, I think you’ve made up for it. [laughs] Draper: Yes. But I’ll tell you, that was a big mistake! <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I’ll bet there are not too many people are turning you down these days.[chuckling] Draper: No, but it was fun to look back on that and be able to talk about it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: We haven’t talked about track record and reputation. Surely, that’s importantin this field. Draper: It’s very important, yes. The deals you do come back, because they say,“Well, you did the Measurex deal, this is good. I like that.” Or, “You did theLSI Logic and we’ve got another semiconductor company.” We did onecompany called Priam [Corporation], and then we backed another disk drivecompany that got to be very, very big, a $2 billion [company].<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And this is all at Sutter Hill? Draper: Yes, Sutter Hill. Well, more recently, I can brag about Skype. The peoplecome in and say, “Gee, well, this is a lot like Skype. You know about that, soyou can help.” That kind of thing. We backed Athena. Recently, one of ourDraper Richards companies has gone public, called Athena Health. GoldmanSachs took it public in December, and we were lucky, because now the publicmarket has dried up. It’s doing very well; it’s running about a $100-milliondollar rate. The way I got into that was through politics. I backed GeorgeH.W. Bush and was in New Hampshire knocking on doors for him years ago.I met his nephew, who was seventeen years old, out with signs. He was acharming kid. So when he called me, the boy, Jonathan [S.] Bush, and said, “I’m starting acompany,”—he had gone to Harvard Business School at that point—it waspretty easy to make a decision that I wanted to go with him, because I knewhis energy level and brains. He had a good idea, which was the back officemanagement of medical clinics, so Athena does everything but medical stuff.In other words, he’ll do the insurance, the billing, all this, all over the Internet.It’s taken a long time. I think Draper Richards did that deal seven years ago.They just went public in December. But you start up a company from a rawstart, and you’ve just got two guys in the office and some money, and you’retrying to make a company out of it, and it takes a long time, typically. So thattook seven years. But now, it was a ten to one for us, something like that. Tentimes our investment. So that isn’t a great deal, but it’s a good one. We have another company that went public fairly recently called DivX, thathad a very creative president but certain management problems, and so on.They were solving those and things really went well, and they went public. They had gotten into a business called Stage6, which put up your little videoclips. It was kind of an entertainment thing. But there wasn’t any revenuecoming. The DivX part of it, the basic money-making part, was somethingcalled codec, compression of digital information. So that on most DVDs now,you’ll see that it’s a DivX inside kind of thing. It’s a good company. You getinto all kinds of things. But the top management is the key to the wholething—nothing more important than the person that’s running the company.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, that might be a good place to end. Draper: All right. I think so, too.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Are there any final thoughts that you want to impart? Draper: No, but Silicon Valley is so lucky, starting with Stanford. I don’t think there’dbe a Silicon Valley without Stanford. So we get in the habit of giving back, soa lot of us write checks to Stanford. But now the whole of Silicon Valley isgetting in the spirit of giving back in a broader sense. The best thing I’vedone, I think—and maybe the thing that I’ll do in my next stage of life is toreally focus on it: we started a foundation called Draper Richards Foundation,and we’ve got two wonderful women from Stanford Business School runningit now. The idea is just like venture capital. You start out an entrepreneurwho’s got a light in his eye, or her eye, and a vision of doing something big,and brain power, and energy, and a willingness to commit their life to it. Wegive them three years of money and attention—it’s got to be the biggestmoney they ever got—and it’s not very big money; it’s like $100,000 a yearfor three years. Then at the end of three years, they’re on their own. But during that three years, these gals go on the board, they help them getmoney, they help them get, let’s say, more management, more contacts, putthe board of directors together—help them in every way they can. At the endof three years, they’re out, they’re graduates of our Draper Richards FellowsProgram. We get them together once a year, and they all share ideas, and theycome out here, and we have experts from outside on different tech topics. Andthat has been really exciting. We did three a year to start, and then four a year;now it’s about six a year that we’re doing. And we just love the wholecon[cept]. One was Room to Read. Ours was their first big money. They now buildthousands of libraries and hundreds of schools in Asia and Africa and theirbudget is $29 million. The fellow wrote a book called Leaving Microsoft toSave the World. Another is a woman that helps immigrants that are not in theirsweet spot, and they’re driving a bus and they’ve got an MD or a double E ora PhD or something. And so we have volunteers that help get them organized. We have one called Little Kids Rock, where kids in grammar school gettogether because a teacher in fourth grade is willing to work with them afterschool. Then if they are, we sign that teacher up, and we give her or him allthe instruments that they need for a band, and if they’re still at it at the end ofthe school year, they get to keep their instruments. That’s been a bonanza,Little Kids Rock. Another is helping hook AIDS knowledge into soccer inAfrica, it’s called Grassroots Soccer. They’re all over the map. We helped start Kiva, which is microlending over the Internet, so that you canlend $50 to a mechanic, or somebody that’s got a business to, say, repairbicycles in Ghana, or a woman that’s running a laundry in Kathmandu. Herface will come up and a little bit about her and everything. We work throughmicrolending organizations around the world. Kiva was just two youngStanford graduates who had the idea of filling in the long tail, they call it, ofmicrolending. Instead of big blocks of money, this is to let somebody who hasthe heart and a small purse connect with somebody in China that needs help,and putting all that together over the internet. They’re just taking off like arocket. Several of these [fellows] have appeared on the Oprah Winfrey Show.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So the idea is to get the organization on its feet, and then they have to go italone? Draper: Just get it started. Then they’re on their own at the end of three [years]. TheRoom to Read fellow, John Wood, has broken all records. We gave him hisfirst $100,000. This year he’s on a $29 million budget. Isn’t that amazing?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: My heavens! Draper: And the woman with the immigration program started in the Bay Area, had along struggle for several years, and then all of a sudden it broke loose. She’snow in New York and Boston, thinking about Chicago. They’re all different.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Where does the money for the foundation come from? Draper: That’s personal—Robin and I. My son, Tim Draper, has just started to add tothe endowment. It’s just our money, now. Maybe we will bring in others later.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I can see why that makes you feel good. Draper: Oh, yes! It’s great. It’s getting to be even more fun that venture capital, whichis more fun than eating ice cream! <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, Mr. Draper, it’s been a real pleasure for me. Draper: Well, I feel the same way.
