Interviewer: Please start by saying where you came from and what that meant for what wasto come. So please tell me about your family and education. Winblad: Well, I grew up in a small town in Minnesota, Farmington, Minnesota. I’msort of like Rebecca of Sunnybrook Farm, although my dad “Soup” Winbladwas a high school basketball coach and my mom Elizabeth was a nurse. Mymom is a first generation American of German origin and my dad is secondgeneration Swedish.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Hence the name. Winblad: Yes, hence the name Winblad [pronouncing name in Swedish]. My parentswere both born in Red Wing, Minnesota, where I was born as well, a townright on the Mississippi River where they have leather tanneries and potteries.My grandfather John Winblad was a motorcycle repairperson after his farmburned down. My other grandfather Adolph Utark worked in one of thefactories in Red Wing. My dad was the first one in his generation to go tocollege. My mom went to nursing school and her younger brother was the firstone to go to college. So my parents placed a very high value on education. I’mthe oldest of six children. My dad taught us to be focused on learning buthighly competitive. Therefore I’m probably unique in that I was both the classvaledictorian and the head basketball cheerleader.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh my! Winblad: Usually considered an oxymoron. I was in high school just as Title IX came tobe, so I missed out on competitive women’s sports, although I was on the firstwomen’s track team in our high school, and I did get a medal in the districttrack meet competition in the long jump. The only athletic letter I had beforethat was in cheerleading, so I was glad to get a real one after that. And that’spretty much my story.My dad’s greatest earnings power was as a master degree teacher. He receivedhis masters in guidance counseling. After he retired from coaching, he becamethe high school guidance counselor, made $18,000. My parents successfullyraised six children. Four of us are college graduates. My brother went tocommunity college and my youngest sister to nursing school.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That’s quite a story, isn’t it?  Winblad: Yes, it is.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You said that he taught you to be competitive. Did that mean in getting ahead?Academics? Or just in life in general? Winblad: I think competition to him— My father ended up with five daughters and oneson, and he grew up in a family with five brothers and one sister. So he had allthese little girls. One of my fondest memories of my dad, who passed awaytwo years ago, is when my mom would ask him to tell us bedtime stories he’dcome in with his chalkboard and say, “Okay, tonight girls we’re going to learna pick and roll.” So we learned the basketball plays, and we really understoodthat there was much more to the game than just the brute force of winning,that there really was strategy. My father took several teams to the state tournament, and his first team inFarmington went to the state tournament. At his memorial when he passedaway, three of his starters showed up. My dad was eighty-six and a reallyyoung coach when he was coaching, so these players were eighty years old.But it was great for me to hear from them what an impact being well coachedmade on their lives, not just winning but being well coached. So winning andachievement meant a lot of things. It meant really understanding the strategyof the game, really understanding how to be a team player, and more thananything what coaching means. In many ways, transitioning from being anentrepreneur, which I was, to a venture capitalist, means a transition frombeing a player to being a coach.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That’s interesting; I hadn’t heard it put so succinctly. Did you feel thepressure, being the oldest? In a traditional family of that era, it’s the boys thatare supposed to get ahead, and the girls trail after them. But I’m suspectingthat that wasn’t true in your case. [laughing] Winblad: The great thing about being the oldest girl is you get a lot of attention fromyour dad because you’re the first one. I’m probably the only girl who actuallyspent time in the boys’ locker room. My mom had a rule on Saturdays whenmy dad would take us to the gym to get things organized for the team, “Do notbring her in the locker room.” Of course, the first thing my dad did was say tous, “We’re going to go in the locker room. There’s nothing in there to worryabout. Just don’t tell your mother.” And of course the first thing I do is,“Where were you?” [my mother asked.] “I was in a locker room,” [I replied].Being raised a good Catholic girl, you never lie. But there was really nomystique about the men’s locker room for me. I spent a bunch of time in it. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [laughing] That must have been formative—opened some doors that otherwisewould be shut, I would think.What impact has religion had on your life? Winblad: My dad is not Catholic. My dad is Lutheran, and in order for my mother tomarry him—and my mother is a very staunch Catholic—they could not bemarried inside the church. They had to be married in the priest’s house, andmy father had to pledge that he would raise us Catholic. So every Sunday mydad would drop us off at the Catholic church, and he would go to the Lutheranchurch. In our small town, there was not a Catholic school. In a smallcommunity in Minnesota, everybody knows the priests, everybody knows thenuns, everybody knows everybody at church. But it was much more thespirituality of the community versus the staunchness of a religion. Today I’m on the board of trustees of the University of St. Thomas, which is adiocesan university but has a very, very strong Catholic mission. So it hasbecome part of my life. I think it really helps you understand what having amission as well as a goal means, really how important integrity is aboveeverything, especially in fiercely competitive and a very Darwinian climatelike Silicon Valley.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you care to say more about high school? Your position as valedictoriantells me right away that you didn’t have any problems academically, but wereyou on a track in a certain direction? Winblad: I was very lucky when I went to school in the sixties and early seventies thatthe Minnesota public school system was extraordinary. I was an ungradedstudent for half of my elementary school classes, so when I was in third gradeI was in classes with sixth graders. There were college preparatory classes,and so it was really, really a great education. I think teachers make a bigdifference to you, and your value of teachers do. I had extraordinary teachersin elementary school who focused on accelerated math, so I got to lovemathematics. That was never something that seemed unnatural to me. Wedidn’t have computer science when I was a high school student, so I learnedthat in college. In particular, my math teachers were very extraordinary. Mr.Kunesh, my sixth-grade teacher who focused on mathematics had puzzles hehad us work on. Jack Ulrich, who was the advanced math teacher in highschool, was really a taskmaster but he made math fun. I remember best from my high school math class there was a boy whom I willnot name who sat behind me, and he was horrible at math but he was tallerthan me. It doesn’t take much; I’m only five two and three-quarters. And so I was really aware that all through high school he was copying my math papers.And I thought, you know, it’s his choice.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You didn’t say anything? Winblad: I didn’t say anything. But he became a millionaire. He built a very, verysuccessful plumbing supply business, became very good at all the things thatbasic mathematics require—inventory management, pricing, distribution. Hetold me later that he actually learned math by copying my math pages.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you served— Winblad: I served a purpose, because he really couldn’t follow the teacher. But he wasso thoughtful in copying my math that he learned a lot. So there are differentways of teaching. I’m glad I never raised my hand and said he was copyingmy papers. [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was it just a natural step to go to—is it University of St. Thomas? Winblad: [College of] Saint Catherine’s.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, Saint Catherine’s. It was close by and it was Catholic. Winblad: Well, I really wanted to go to one of the Ivies or somewhere like Stanford, butrealistically there was no money even for a plane ticket to go do theinterviews. I went to Saint Catherine’s. It had high academic standards, and itwas part of a five-college cooperative. I could take classes at Macalester, St.Thomas, Augsburg, and Hamline. And so I was part of a very good fivecollege set. Many of these are nationally recognized colleges, including St.Thomas. When I went there, I was very disappointed because I was anaggressive overachiever, and I didn’t think it was hard enough. So I remembercoming back at Thanksgiving and crying and saying, “I have to go to a betterschool, Dad, I have to,” and my dad sitting me down and saying, “Look, youhave a big scholarship here, you have jobs, there’s no travel associated with it.This is all we can really afford and all that you can really afford, so make thebest of it.” It was a disappointment to me, but I actually did make the best ofit.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And you did find computer science?  Winblad: I did. And here I was very fortunate, because we had a semester breakprogram, and during our break time we’d pick classes. We had DigitalEquipment on our campus in a computer center that DEC ran. One of the mathprofessors, Sister Seraphine, decided to teach programming and got DEC toagree that we could all go into the computing center for the university. Shetaught the interim there.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now was that unusual in that day? Winblad: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: This is early seventies? Winblad: Yes, this is early seventies. Computer science was not a major in most places.In fact it was part of the liberal arts major even at Stanford. Sister Seraphinebecame ill, so I had to step up to the plate and teach that class the nextsemester.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did that strike terror in your soul? Winblad: No. [laughter] Nothing strikes terror in my soul.Then a number of things happened. One of the professors at St. Thomasstepped forward to build a computer science-quantitative methods major there,and his name was Steve Nachtscheim. I took those classes at St. Thomas.Steve left St. Thomas to become an executive at Intel, and years later I metSteve at Intel. I later recruited Steve to the University of St. Thomas board oftrustees where he and I both serve today. Steve’s only a couple years olderthan me. So Steve said, “No, there’s no way you were in my class.” And Isaid, “I was the only woman. How could you forget me? And I was good inyour class! Look—here’s the textbook. I’ve kept it, and here is the instructor’sname in it, and it is your name. And there’s only one Stephen Nachtscheim.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Not the most common name. Winblad: So fortunately for me, classes appeared at St. Thomas. I was able to take them.There was no major but it was really fun.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Nobody was saying to you, “Listen, this is a male purview. You’re going tohave trouble here.” There was no anti-feminine stuff going on?  Winblad: No one ever. By the time I got to the end of the math major, it’s me and threeguys. The business major, it’s me and the guys. No one ever said that to me.Fortunately, this whole multiple campus situation, it was liberal arts collegesfor the most part with strong math and computer science offerings during thatperiod of time that got stronger over time. In that I was lucky. Had I been fiveyears earlier, I might have had an inferior math major, and I might have beenbusiness and liberal arts, which I don’t think would have been adequate for mein the profession I chose.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Your original ambition to go east may not have been the best place for you tobe in that era. Winblad: Yes, and when you say how could you rewrite your life, mine is like aplaybook. So it was very fortunate when I graduated in ‘73, undergraduate, itwas a big affirmative action year, so everybody wanted diversity. Well, guesswhat—I’m the only graduate who’s got a math major, a business major, andcomputer science classes. I was highly sought after, so I got a very, very goodjob after college, in fact one that I was barely qualified for, so it was a greatstretch job for me.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And where was it? Winblad: At the Federal Reserve Bank as a systems programmer. So my first job was asa systems programmer, right along the computer science thing.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Had you been doing some programming in school? Winblad: Oh yes, only as classes, but not ever commercially or professionally, so I wasa novice.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that a stretch? Winblad: No.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Nothing’s a stretch, is it? [laughing] Winblad: My job today is a stretch. Being a venture capitalist is a stretch. The job at theFederal Reserve Bank was a well-defined job. I had to learn quickly on thejob. That was the expectation that was given to me, and I did a pretty good jobat that. I resigned from that position thirteen months later because it was not going to be, in my view, over my career, a stretch job. And that’s when Istarted my own software company [Open Systems, Inc.]. But my job today is a stretch. I’m in the business of new. My job is not reallyto predict the future but to find the future, so anything I invest in is unknown.It has only assumptions, not facts. I invest at the highest risk point, at theearliest stage of software companies. I invest in high-risk individuals,entrepreneurs. Most of them have never done their jobs before, just like I hadnever done mine. And we don’t yet know until we actually start building thesecompanies whether the assumptions we make about building great value forlarge markets are valid. So everything I do is a stretch every day! [laughing]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, and you love it, I bet. Winblad: I do. I love it. It’s painful when it’s unsuccessful. That’s why we’re calledventure capitalists, versus just capitalists. It’s joyous and surprising when it issuccessful.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So early on you knew that you wanted a job that was going to stretch you. Iimagine that the Federal Reserve was looked upon by most people as a prettygood career. Winblad: Oh, yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And particularly at your young age. What were you—twenty-one? Winblad: I was, and for me it was really a big career move because they had never hireda right-out-of college student at the grade level that they had hired me. I wasable to get my master’s degree [in Education with a focus in Economics]during that thirteen months in an executive program at St. Thomas. So at thatpoint in time I would have been the only woman in the Federal Reserve Bankof Minneapolis with a master’s degree. There weren’t a lot of women thereeither. So there would have been an opportunity for me, even on the diversitycard, to surge up to heights that I was totally unqualified for and to earn theright to have those jobs. People often ask me: are entrepreneurs made or born? And I think I was madeto be an entrepreneur. I didn’t say look, I want to start a software companybecause I want to be an entrepreneur. I just said I want to start a softwarecompany because I love software, and I want out of here. [laughter] So I saidokay, I really like one thing. The reason I want out of here is not that they’renot paying me well, not that I still have to pay off my student loans, not thatthere’s not a great career path for me, not that my family is already incredibly proud of me—but it’s not joyous. And so what is joyous for me? The conceptthat I would write software with a group of people, and we would turn it intoproducts and actually sell them—that felt like it could be really joyous.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You left the Federal Reserve with that in mind? Winblad: Yes, because I convinced two guys to take a sabbatical for a year to join asvendors, and one guy quit with me. And so the three gentlemen and I startedthe company.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And they were at the Federal Reserve? Winblad: Yes. They knew what they were doing. They actually had programmingexperience. At thirteen months of actually writing code, I was still quite anovice. [laughing]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, tell me how the company emerged. Winblad: We basically had to find some revenue, because I had to pay off those studentloans. We had to find a contract to deliver on, so we responded to a request forproposal for an accounting system for schools. That we got. So we did thatduring the day, and we said what kind of code are we going to write? Becausethere were these new PCs coming out. And I said, “Hey! Why don’t we justprogram my accounting textbook from college?” So we took out my Pyle andWhite textbook, and we said, let’s write software that does accounting, orwhat would be called ERP [enterprise resource planning] systems. So westarted on page one—not that any of us were experts in accounting—and westarted writing in a couple different languages, one for PCs and one for midrange computing accounting systems.By the way, my accounting textbook was a used textbook, because I couldn’tafford new textbooks. I always detested textbooks where there washighlighting in them, because I didn’t really understand highlighting. I couldnever find an accounting textbook that wasn’t highlighted, so we had to takeout that dreadful Pyle and White textbook, which I still have today, which hadall this yellow highlighting and dog-ears on it, and that became the softwarethat we wrote.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was anybody doing anything like this in accounting?  Winblad: Well, we didn’t know. You have to remember now we’re pretty much inalmost 1976 when we start the company, so we started this company the sameyear Microsoft started. Microsoft started in ‘75, Apple in ‘76, Oracle in ‘77.It’s not like we have Facebook to talk to each other or even e-mail. Soanybody starting a software company at this time doesn’t know anybody else.It’s all spontaneous combustion. Microsoft’s in Albuquerque. There’s acompany out here [in California] called Digital Research in Monterey. There’ssome stuff happening out here but it’s mostly hardware, and we startedcoming out here to meet the hardware vendors. But nobody’s saying, hey,let’s all come to a conference and figure out what software we should write.We’re just all on our own, thinking it’s our own brilliant idea. It’s soridiculous how it all worked. And in fact there were hundreds of companiesbeing started at that time. And it was who happened to make the right choicesfor the right languages, the right operating systems, and the right machines,and the right route to market that made any money or even survived.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How do you explain this spontaneous generation? Is it that it trite to say thatthe technology was ready? But then you have to have the human mind that cantake it somewhere. Winblad: Yes, and one thing I will remind you of in that period of 1975-1976 isunemployment was 11 percent in Minnesota. And this period was followed byinflation, if you remember, gas lines.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right, the Arab oil crisis. Winblad: I remember I had a little red Opel, and I had to sit in those gas lines. So themacro environment was not saying, hey, quit your jobs and start companies.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And the stock market was not doing well in those years. Winblad: Yes, but none of us owned any stocks, so we didn’t notice. [laughter]I had a little passbook from Midwest Federal, a little paper book that I had torip out a page every month and mail in a check. That’s all I knew, thatMidwest Federal was getting a check from me every month for my studentloans. It had a little green tree on it, and I would stare at that green tree andgo—what does that green tree mean? It just means that I have to earn thismuch money, at least, every month. Well, what it does mean is that innovationis not on a curve, that it’s a step function. And every once in a while,especially in the software industry, the dynamics of innovation come together.In this case, it was the beginning of the PC era. Nobody tells you it’s coming.  You’ve heard the stories of Bill [Gates] and Paul Allen reading about themicroprocessor. One of the rules that we had is we’re not going to writesoftware for any computer we have to assemble, because I don’t know how touse a soldering iron, me personally. I can’t imagine people soldering thesethings together. So we skipped a whole bunch of machines that people weretrying to write software for, and we said only until it gets fully assembled.Those are the machines we’ll program for. That seemed like a ridiculouschoice, but people were racing to program for the Commodore PET and thingsthat people had to assemble.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And in the end wasting their time. Winblad: Right, and also building software that was pretty small and really wasn’tusable for businesses. We also said, look, we’re not going to program forindividuals because we are going to program for businesses—because who’sgoing to run accounting systems? So some of our early novice rules—okay, what are our rules of engagement?It gives you a great insight into entrepreneurs. Markets are new, they’re fresh,the lenses some of these entrepreneurs use are lenses for survival, and they’regood lenses. Some of the choices they make are not based on McKinsey’sstrategic assumptions. They’re just based on okay, we’re going to have tomake some decisions, and we’re going to have to make them quickly, andwe’re going to make them now. The main thing that we ask entrepreneurs is, “What are your assumptions?How did you make them? Do you have an assumption set? Are you justwinging it?” And my competitors who winged it were weaving all over,because the noise level as the PC market picked up was unbelievable! Therewas a new language, new environment, new machine every month after thisthing got going. And without a core assumption set people were running allover the place. So for us, we had to wait for these step functions of innovation, and I wasfortunate to pick one of those to start a company. Our company did not needventure capital, which was good because there was no venture capital forsoftware companies at that time. By the mid-seventies, Sequoia [Capital] andKleiner Perkins are three- and four-year-old companies. The good news forme is one of the first hardware companies we picked to program on wasfunded by Sequoia Capital.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that Don Valentine?  Winblad: It was. It was a company called CADO Systems, and we programmed for thatcomputer. Little did I know that we should have made an assumption to onlyprogram for hardware companies that had venture funding—the others will goout of business—but I didn’t know enough about venture capital to pick that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Looking back, do you think that you had any disadvantage geographically inbeing in the Midwest? Winblad: Not at that time, and we were cognizant of that. We worked very early on withNovell and the Novell operating system, and they flew their programmersfrom Utah to Minneapolis, so they were geographically constrained. But wedidn’t try to find our market locally. That was never available to us. We neverhad a local hardware vendor to pick, so we had to get on airplanes early, andwe decided we wanted to be part of the software industry, not just a localsoftware company. So we set out goals high, and for the most part theyworked.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you doing most of this goal setting? How were you working with yourpartners? There were four of you at the head of the show at Open Systems? Winblad: Yes. One of the co-founders, who was a really great programmer, TimDickinson, a really great strategic thinker, was always thinking about thebroader assumption set, and that’s how people program. It’s an if-then world.The other two were great partners but were not as great strategic thinkers.None of them wanted to do the fly to California and get a big deal done orwhatever—they wanted to build product. So it all worked out. We hired acorporate psychologist early on.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, you’re kidding! Winblad: This was just a collegiate thing, because I had business psychology—doesn’teverybody do this? Just assess our strengths and weaknesses, and how wewould best work together, and how we would add employees. For our firstfifty employees, we had this corporate psychologist interview them. So no oneever quit. That was a bad thing. We did such a good job in hiring thateverybody fit, at least the first fifty. So we said well, maybe we’ve got toshake it up a little. We did a lot of things very thoughtfully, some probablyoverthoughtfully, but that was one of them.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And then time goes on and you sell the company in 1982.  Winblad: I actually sell the company at the end of 1984. And if I remember right,almost at the end of ’84, I move out here, because I made a commitment tostay at the company until someone else was hired to run it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why did you sell Open Systems? Winblad: We kept getting offers, and we brought back in the psychologist and said,“Well, okay, we’re going to have to make this really big or sell it. Who’s infor making it real big?” It turned out that only I was up for the task or willingfor the task [to enlarge the company]. Everybody else said, “This is fine. Thisis a lot of money for each individual.” And by the way, two of the foundersnever worked after that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And of course that never occurred to you, did it? [laughing] Winblad: No!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I could have predicted. Winblad: One of them did, and one of them just decided to manage his little nest egg,and the other person set up a little theater company in Wisconsin and movedthere. So this just blew me away, but it told me it was the right decision,because all four of us were fundamental to going forward. It’s like, are we upto doubling again or not? So it worked out well for all of us.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, before we leave the Midwest, let’s bring in Bill Gates. I’m picturing thatall these very bright groups competing in the PC market are very independent. Winblad: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So how did you meet Bill Gates? Winblad: Well, I’d been to Microsoft a few times, and I had met Paul and a number ofother people. When Microsoft was considering a strong foray into the Unixoperating system, we were the largest Unix software vendor. Now peopletoday would refer to it as Linux in its next generation. So we ran all of oursoftware on Unix for mid-range companies, and Microsoft was decidingwhether they would stay with their version of Unix called Xenix. So weworked very closely with Microsoft, but I had never met Bill. I never thought,gee, I need to meet Bill Gates. [laughter] I was kind of busy.  Winblad: So I was a speaker at a conference in 1983. And yes, you’re right—I had soldmy company at the end of ’82. So I’d just sold my company, because this wasFebruary of ‘83, and Bill was a speaker as well at Esther Dyson’s conference.At that point in time, what happened is, with so few women in the industry, itwas almost national news: woman does something in software industry.Nobody actually cared what. By the way, I was one of the first companies to get liquidity in this earlysoftware era. Microsoft was not yet public and would not be public till ‘85.Remember, Microsoft in ‘84 was just finishing a year of $75 million inrevenue, so we’re talking small numbers here of everything, especiallyrelative to today. Facebook files with $3.7 billion in revenue. So people don’trealize how nascent and small the software industry was. We were thesixteenth largest software company in the world. So no software company hadhad $100 million in revenue and would not for a couple years. So we were allout there with picks and shovels, plowing down.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It seems to me that at the time for most people in finance software is off theradar screen. Does that explain why venture capital wasn’t really paying muchattention to what was happening in software? Winblad: Well, basically at this point in time it has been called Silicon Valley for awhile. You’ve talked to the founders of venture capital here, and these aresemiconductor guys and systems guys. For all of our software, we’re not yetselling it separate from the hardware, even though it came in its own boxes.People would buy a piece of hardware and buy our software with it. We soldthrough Don Valentine’s company, CADO, the CADO Systems dealernetwork. And the dealer sold our software every time they sold hardware. Itwas not on the machines, but they would install it with the machines. Therewas not yet an aftermarket. That would not really happen until we got furtherinto the launch of the IBM personal computer, and there were enoughinstalled machines that people would buy it for one thing and then buy moresoftware for it. See, the install base was small, so we were still building thesupply chain for software. Software was pretty rudimentary. We would haveto jig around with the operating system, so it was a good thing that I was asystems programmer at one time in my life.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You needed it. Winblad: We did, we actually did. The three guys that were the co-founders were truesystems programmers, and without that knowledge we couldn’t have writtencode this early on that actually worked and delivered value to customers.  So back to the question of Bill. I was one of the stars of the show of thatparticular conference, because everybody was asking, well gee, people paidyou real money for this company? And you’re now a multimillionairesoftware girl? And who the hell are you? Where did you come from?[laughing] Where is Minnesota—is that Minneapolis or Minndeanapolis?Where is that place? And you went to St. Thomas—is that in the Bahamas? Iremember Bill Gates said, “I read your bio—there’s a lot of saints in that bio.”One of the first questions that Bill asked me, he goes, “What were your SATscores?” Of course I did know what they were, but they weren’t quite as highas his, but they were impressive enough for him. And I go well, here’s whatthey were. So Bill and I became good friends. We had a lot in common,including a lot of passion for our industry. We are both avid readers, not justabout technology but other things. He’s a great jokester, so we became goodfriends, and it was at that conference that we met each other and have beenreally good friends since.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you learn from him and he learned from you in running a business or justin leading your lives? Winblad: Well, clearly, Bill is a natural teacher. He loves communicating what he’slearned to others. And he’s not at rest unless he’s learned something. He isvoracious in learning. Even today he’s constantly— He really loves onlinelearning now, so he’s watching all these online lectures on topics all over theplace, so he’s constantly sending me an online lecture and saying, “This is thebest online lecture on geophysics. You’ll really love this. Watch it during yourworkout.”The thing that I learned most from Bill at the macro level is that I alwaysthink, especially to be a venture capitalist, that you have to be interested inknowing something new. [indicating with hand] My bar was here; Bill’s barwas here [raising arm to a higher level]. Whenever I feel like I’m getting alittle lazy, and I’m not really a good student of what’s going on, I think, oh mygosh, what is Bill learning right now?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I’ve got to hurry up and catch up. Winblad: Yes, because my table stakes are not as strong as his. So Bill, from the day ofmeeting him, was an inspiration to me to dig in on the intellectual staminalevel. And there is a lot of fun in really turning the crank on intellectualstamina. It takes a lot of physical stamina to be an entrepreneur because it’shard work, but it takes tremendous intellectual stamina to be successful. Andwhen you slack off on that, you lose curiosity about things, curiosity aboutpeople. You lose your ability to parse how new things work. So that was my learning from Bill, and I hope that I am a voracious enough student that I pushhis intellectual stamina a little bit.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But how in heaven’s name do you find time? I just looked at the number ofboards that you sit on. And that, for most ordinary people, would be quiteenough to occupy oneself. And then having to switch your attention from oneset of problems to another set of problems and keeping it straight and notlosing focus. I would think you’d get exhausted! Winblad: You have to be a very good multitasker, and you have to be good at focusingyour attention in the moment. You also cannot be a worrier to be a venturecapitalist, and you have to lean forward. Yesterday’s mistakes are yesterday’smistakes and tomorrow’s learning. Anyone who’s a handwringer should neverapproach the career path of venture capital. Anyone who needs to selfflagellate themselves more than five minutes and if you can’t figure out howmistakes turns into learning, pick another profession. One of the great gifts of meeting Bill was to meet Bill’s mother, Mary Gates.Mary unfortunately passed away before her sixty-fifth birthday, but Mary tooka strong interest in me. And Mary was an amazing person. She clearly was agreat mother because she has three great children; a great wife; she had a greatand loving husband. Mary herself was active in the schools, on the board ofthe University of Washington, on multiple other boards. Whenever you wouldmeet Mary, you got a handwritten thank-you note. And she always looked puttogether, she never looked tired, she always was present in the moment. I saidto her, thirty years ago, “Mary, how do you find time for all this?” At thispoint in time, I am a relatively young venture capitalist, I’m not on that manyboards, I haven’t yet joined my university board, I haven’t joined a nonprofitboard yet. She said, “You know Ann, it’s amazing how much time you reallyhave, and how much time you waste, and how much time you can find forothers, how much time you can find to sit down quietly and thank others, howmuch time you can find for kindness, let alone how much time you can findfor contributing your own intellectual capital as well as your financial capital.As you get older you’ll find that you actually get even better at that.” And thatwas a real inspiration to me, to say, hey, it’s not about how fast you pedal, it’sabout how clearly you focus.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: California. Was that an obvious next step? Winblad: You know, it’s so long ago that people ask me why I did things and I forgetthe why. I just did them. Yes, it was. One of the benefits I got from being oneof the pioneers in the PC software industry is I met a lot of people just likeme, my age, fun, smart, and they became my friends as well because I spentso much time with them, so much time building this company. And they weren’t in Minnesota, and there was not a budding software industry there,and my passion for software just grew stronger and not weaker. I thought, Ican have distant friendships and find something else to do here in the TwinCities, which is a wonderful place, and I love the Twin Cities dearly and dostill spend time there. Or I can move out here. And I moved out here.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What were your parents saying, losing their eldest and probably mostsuccessful— Winblad: My entire family was pretty excited, because they knew that I had discoveredwinter was optional, could afford to take the option, and they could visit me insomeplace warm for the six months of the year when they were all living inigloos. So there was joy in the Minnesota family that I had actually taken thisstep.A lot of people interviewed my dad because he was well known in Minnesota.He was in the Minnesota Athletic Hall of Fame. How did he feel about myaccomplishments at that time when I was being interviewed. And he goes,“Look, all my children are fantastic.” He just was really great about that.“They’re all worth millions to me.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Before we get into what you actually did when you arrived, please talk aboutthe storied Silicon Valley culture, maybe in comparison to what you hadexperienced in the Minneapolis area. Winblad: Well, I knew very little about venture capital. I knew one venture capitalist,Don Valentine, a very unique, skilled, focused individual, from my interactionwith CADO Systems Corporation, which was a very good interaction. So thisis a good segue into what I did in California and my true understanding ofSilicon Valley. I didn’t really think about it as I’m going to Silicon Valley.But it was Silicon Valley.One of my customers at Open Systems was Altos Computers, and I had todrive out to the apple orchards where Altos was in San Jose. In fact, whenthey first built their first computers they shipped them in fake fruit crates, so itwas much more like the apple orchards that you people talk about. When I got out here—I had purchased a flat in San Francisco—I went to thelittle neighborhood grocery store, and the grocer said, “Ann, it’s so great tomeet you.” I said, “Wow, what a friendly city! The grocer already knowsme.” Little did I know that I was already in the Sunday magazine as one of thenew Silicon Valley entrepreneurs. I was a little late that day to buy the Sundaypaper, so I was recognizable by my photo. I started getting calls from venture capitalists, and they said, “Look, weinvested in this software company, and it’s not working well. Can you take alook at it?” And I go, “You know, I just got here. And in fact my furniture andclothes are not even here because the truck broke down in the Grand Canyon.So could I be here for a couple of weeks before I start looking at brokensoftware companies?” I had agreed to do a project for Price Waterhouse, which they had called meabout, to work as a consultant on their technology forecast across all thetechnologies. That seemed to be a good thing to do as a warm-up project,because I knew one thing—it wasn’t like I was the princess of software here. Iworked thirteen months at the Federal Reserve Bank, six years in my ownlittle software company, building PC software, mid-market ERP (accounting)software for businesses—that’s it. I knew a lot of people in the PC softwareindustry, because by this time we knew each other because we were at thesame conferences. I probably knew a bit about operating systems, lots aboutbusiness software, but not much more. I knew about mainframes; I actuallyknew about minicomputers. So Price Waterhouse wanted me to help put theforecast together. That gave me an opportunity to interview the technologyleaders in every single technology segment, from systems to semiconductorsto operating systems—every kind of software that was being built. I thought,I’ll interview them, I’ll put a team together to help build this worldwidetechnology forecast, and that was fantastic. So I didn’t have a lot of time.I’d also agreed to write this textbook on object-oriented software. [Ann L.Winblad, David R. King, & Samuel D. Edwards, Object-Oriented Software.Addison-Wesley, 1990.] By this time I was kind of well known, and I thoughtokay, I’ll write a book. How hard can that be?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Price Waterhouse wanted you to do that? Or you just saw a need? Winblad: No, Addison-Wesley had called, another friend had called me to do that. AndI said, “Oh, that sounds easy.” That was hard, too. So that was lined up for thenear future.It’s ‘85, and I’m lined up for ‘85 on all these projects. I actually hoped I couldtake a couple vacations here. [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I would think! Winblad: So these venture capitalists kept calling me, and I kept going to visit thesecompanies, and that was really tiring, and I stopped doing that. Anotherventure capitalist called up and said, “Look, you really don’t understand howSilicon Valley works. Venture capitalists are important. If you ever want to start a company— The PC software companies had all been formed; weweren’t yet in the next step function of innovation, so it was a good time forme to do these projects, and I’d overcommitted myself. “So you really shouldbuild some chits here, Ann, because if you start a software company you’regoing to want money this time around.” Well, at least he was honest with me. So I started going to see these software companies again, and that’s where Iactually met John Hummer. I’d looked at one of these companies and hadbrought to the board how they might turn it around, what actually thesymptoms they were seeing, what the problems really were. There were very,very few skills in really understanding how to put one of these softwarecompanies together, because there were very few that got to scale. Thosepeople were busy; they weren’t selling off their companies in droves like Iwas. So John started stalking me and said, “Look, I want to start a venturecapital firm focused on software.” And I said, “You know, these venturecapitalists don’t seem to know a lot about software. Why would I want to beone of them? I’m going to start another software company.” I was waitingaround for some new technologies to come into play, and I’d looked at thingslike artificial intelligence and done some work with a couple companies therebut that looked really hard. I spent a bunch of time at Stanford looking atartificial intelligence. I’d looked at where is this Unix operating system goingto go? I did a project for Microsoft there, and Unix hadn’t come to fruition yetbecause one thing was missing. Oracle was still toiling away on server-baseddatabases, and client-server computing had not yet started. So we were on theremnants of the PC era and not quite there. So John was starting to win theargument. So in early ’87 we said okay, let’s start forming this thing, a venture capitalpartnership. Well, again, just as we start forming it, if you remember whathappens at that time, the disk drive industry collapses, the semiconductorindustry collapses, there’s massive unemployment in Silicon Valley—great!Perfect time for me to change jobs again! [laughter] So we got our pitchtogether; we practiced our pitch. John neglected to tell me that no one hasraised a new venture capital fund for five years. Everyone has abandoned theasset class; there were no new funds. We go out there and start meeting withpeople. We have 133 meetings—everybody says no. They said, “No, we’renot funding venture capital firms, and why would we fund a software firm?The assets walk out the door at night. That’s the stupidest thing we’ve everheard.” We go back to the drawing board—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: The programmers are leaving? Winblad: Yes, because there’s no hard assets. We’re doing poorly in the semiconductorthing, why would we pick this group of venture capitalists? So we go back,and we have to come up with a trick pony. So we go back to Don Valentine, Pitch Johnson, and Bill Edwards, who are all venture capitalists at the time,and we say, “Can you help us?” And they agree. We have to go to theirrespective firms and pitch this idea that they’ll each put a half a million dollarsinto our firm, and then we can go out again and say that Pitch Johnson, BillEdwards, and Don Valentine are supporters of our fund.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, that’s a big plus. Winblad: It was a huge plus, and it was the seminal thing. We went back to St. Paul, andwe pitched to two firms there, St. Paul Insurance and 3M Corporation, andthey both said yes. They both said yes on the combination of, I think, thecommitment of the hometown girl and the experience of John who’d been aventure capitalist for a few years. But the endorsement of Pitch, John, and Billwas seminal to me becoming a venture capitalist and the creation of HummerWinblad Venture Partners.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That was the 134th pitch that did it? Winblad: [laughter] It was. But I will say one thing—I think it was Pasteur that said,“Luck benefits the prepared mind.” And there really is no such thing as luck.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Not just chance. Yes, you were lucky, but there was more to it than that,obviously. Talk about John Hummer a bit, please. Winblad: So you’ve asked me about John Hummer. Well, John is a very uniqueindividual himself. His pedigree is much more like most of the venturecapitalists here in Silicon Valley. He went to Princeton undergrad andStanford for his MBA. One thing John did differently is in between Princetonand Stanford he played six years in the National Basketball Association. Johnwas a first-round draft pick out of Princeton, played for the SeattleSupersonics, and was a noted center there. John is six ten. He’s the tallestventure capitalist. I’m five two and three-quarters—I probably am theshortest. [laughter] So we were memorable when we were fundraising.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I guess! Winblad: I talked over my career decision with my dad and told him that I was going tobe a venture capitalist. My mom and dad had no clue what a venture capitalistwas. They’d just figured out what software was. But they didn’t care. The ideafor my dad that I would actually partner up with an ex-professional basketball 20player was his dream come true. I brought John home to meet my parents.You know, he’s a pretty big guy, so my mom cooked enough food for tenpeople, and my dad polished up all of his high school medals. He lettered inbasketball, football, and baseball in college. He shined up all his trophies fromcollege, all his medals from his high school tournaments, and they were alllaid out on our dining room table. My dad was so excited to meet JohnHummer. I actually didn’t think about that when John had approached me, butmy dad was, as we would say in Minnesota, tickled pink and so proud to beassociated with John as much as he was proud of his own daughter.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Nice story. You’ve said that John had been a venture capitalist for a few years. Winblad: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You’d been watching venture capital, and you’d been receiving phone callsfrom venture capitalists. But I’m still imagining that the jump from being anentrepreneur to venture capitalist required acquiring new knowledge. Winblad: Well, there’s a technology to venture capital. How do you actually construct afund? And we got some good help there because you don’t know how to dothat. And then how do you construct term sheets, what actually makes for agood financing, what makes for a bad financing? Not how you build acompany, but how do you construct the capital framework so it works forscaling for you and for the company and for the entrepreneurs? And John hadbeen well mentored there and brought that to the table. You don’t learn that inschool; you get some classes on it, but you don’t really learn it. I had beenrunning a company, and then I had now spent some time consultingcompanies at a larger scale but still relatively small like Microsoft, or reallybig ones like Price Waterhouse or IBM, and small ones when I was looking atones that I might join or I might run or whatever. So it turned out that it was actually good that there had been a period of timebetween the time I was running a company to my role as a consultant, where Iwas coaching. You make a change from a player to a coach. Realistically,once you fully make that change you can’t go back. The hardest change for ayoung venture capitalist is you actually do have a lot more experience ifyou’ve been in the same industry and running companies than the first-timeCEO you fund. You have to learn how to teach, not tell; [learn] when it isimportant to grab the CEO from jumping off a cliff versus having themunderstand what the edge of a cliff looks like. There are a lot of skills inplaying the supporting cast role and the board member role. There’s a lot oflearning how to help build the boards, how to select your co-investors, how tofigure out what is your role on the board, so that you get the maximum value not just from yourself but from others, not just the entrepreneurs but the boardmembers themselves. And I was not fully learned on all those things. Interestingly enough, one of the first deals we did, we offered that deal,Control Point Software up to Sequoia [Capital] as a co-lead, and Don[Valentine] was on the board with me. That was quite a learning experiencefor me in learning both things to do and not to do. One of the next deals wedid was with a younger partner, Doug Leone, at Sequoia, where we bothlearned together, and that was really helpful for us both. But there is a learningcurve. We were fortunate that another thing happened when we started our fund.Because it took us so long to get the fund funded, guess what? We were at oneof these innovation step functions, exactly at the point of the launch of clientserver computing. So we cleaned up. We founded a company called Arbor[Software] which became Hyperion, a two-person startup, [which] was thecreator of business intelligence; a company called Powersoft, which becamethe leading development tool company for distributed databases that Larry[Ellison] at Oracle had now brought to market; a company called Scopus[Technology], the first CRM [customer relationship management] system. Sowe funded sixteen companies—half of them went public. So our first fund,which was only $35 million, was a grand success. And again, timing, which iseverything, was very beneficial to us. So the amount of time it took us to havethose hundreds of meetings to get our first $35 million turned out to be ablessing to us, because this put us smack on the beginning of an innovationstep function.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you’re right. There is an element of luck, isn’t there? Winblad: There is, there is.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I know you had one failure in that initial fund—Slate. Do you want to talkabout that? Winblad: Oh yes. Unfortunately, we had, I think, three companies out of the sixteenwhich were not grand successes. The one that was not a success for me was aKleiner Perkins [Caufield & Byers] deal that we did, called Slate. We fundedsome very notable people, including Tom Byers, who was professor of theyear the year before last at Stanford. Tom is in the engineering department atStanford and is a renowned professor worldwide, and he teachesentrepreneurship around the world from the vantage point of the engineeringschool. In fact, I think he’s in Abu Dhabi teaching that today. Tom had neverrun a company before, and Kleiner Perkins, where his brother was— <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, Brook Byers. Winblad: —and Vern Raburn of Lotus and Microsoft fame at the time, and Dottie Hall,ex-Microsoft. We built the first software for tablets. Not in anyone’s memoryin the time was that in the early 1990s [these] were the first tablets that cameout. Everybody had one. They were huge failures. I still have five in mycloset. I think I should give them to the Computer History Museum if theydon’t have them.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You should! Winblad: The company did extremely well in building the products, extremely well ingetting distribution on all these tablets. But guess what, nobody bought thetablets. So our assumption about the quality of the team turned out to be fact.Their ability to build the software—fact. Their ability to find a route to thecustomer—fact. The assumption that customers in droves would buy tablets—not fact. So we lost—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was it just an assumption? Had they done any testing of the waters to see howthe tablet might fly? Winblad: Well, when you do early-stage investing, there’s no waters to test. The wavesare under the surface. We have to fund the waves before they break on thesurface, so we have to fund the companies just as we see technologies comingtogether. Sometimes they don’t come together. One of the companies that we funded early that turned out to be a greatsuccess was Wind River, now the ARM division of Intel. And it was acompany that I found at the Embedded Systems Conference. So they builtsoftware for printers that have embedded software in them, and other devices.We were almost too early there. There were sixteen companies that had a tinybit of revenue, and we guessed wrong about the velocity of the embeddedsystems market, but we guessed right about this particular company to own itall. So they started defeating any other incumbents. So the aggregation of allthe marketplaces there built a big enough company, called Wind River, for usto take public.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that because they had technological advantages in their product? Whywere they ahead of the crowd? Winblad: I think the investors helped them, us as investors and co-investors, as to whatit was to own a marketplace versus just to build the best software; how to really build a high-growth business around the best technology versus alwayscompeting just with the technology; not just winning deals but owning acustomer base; and owning not just a customer base but becoming number onein the marketplace. Now there was enough of a market to do it there. In the case of Slate, there was not. [laughing] And we lost, I think, a millionand change, so it wasn’t what I’ll call a big loss. But you don’t want to win inall your first companies, otherwise it means you’re being overselective.You’re not taking enough risk; you’re not pushing into where things mightcome together. And of course, Dottie and Vern and Tom all went on to greatcareers. Kleiner Perkins is still in business. We were able to co-lead that dealwith the top venture capitalists of the day. They’d been around since ‘73; we’dbeen around for two years.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That was a pretty good advertisement right there, wasn’t it? Winblad: Yes, but again, it was not that we said, gee, we’ll do this because KleinerPerkins is doing it. Our judgment at the time was there was going to be a bigmarket opportunity, and our judgment was wrong. By the way, it was wrongby twenty-five years. [laughter] But if we’d done it today, it would be reallyright. And interestingly enough, Slate built little apps, so everything they didwas right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It was just before the time. Winblad: When I look at the thing you have to laugh. So again, our job is not to predictthe future, our job is to find it. But to find it at the right time. And nolaughing.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Talk about how much you actually participate in the management of acompany. How hands-on are you? Winblad: Well, we are hands-on in helping build the management team. The focus ofour firm is still 100 percent software, and our focus today is investing in theearly stage, meaning we are usually the first venture investor in thesecompanies. Typically, there’s two to ten people, and more often than not it’scloser to two than ten. So we play a very important role, both for the foundersand for the company, in helping recruit and build the management team. Italked earlier about how no one helped me, but we hired a psychologist.[laughing] Even then it was important for us to build the right team and reallyunderstand our own strengths and weaknesses so that we could build the rightteam. The CEO reports to the board, so we play an important role indetermining if the CEO is doing a good-enough job. We cannot run the company. And in fact if we feel that we are diving in and telling the companywhat to do, occasionally we have—not occasionally—we are asked to giveour recommendation, and we give firm opinions. But if we find ourselvesrunning the company, that means that company is broken or we’re broken.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Are you unusual in that? Winblad: No. I think all good venture capitalists will tell you, if they believe that theboard is running the company, it’s either time to sell that company or time toget a new CEO. Something’s fundamentally broken, either on boarddynamics, the CEO themselves, or the company.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But it’s a very delicate relationship, isn’t it? Knowing how much tointerfere—or advise. I shouldn’t use a prejudiced word. Winblad: We bring independent board members on that might be experienced CEOs ifwe have a first-time CEO. We do really understand that the CEO may have areal bonded experience with some of the board members and not others,where they might see not all board members as career mentors for them. Thatis fine as long as the mentors they pick are good ones. Sometimes it’s hard forboard members to adjust to the fact that they’re not the chosen mentor. To me,you have to look at the bigger picture and the role of the cooperative, not yourindividual role. We’re judged in the harsh reality of returns. Do we build goodcompanies that have liquidity paths? And those liquidity paths can be multipleones. Zero-sum multiples are homeruns. It’s sometimes hard in doing your jobevery day, especially when you’re a young venture capitalist, to keep your eyeon what your ball is. We have to help build companies. It’s not about yourvanity; it’s not about you feeling like you’re the smartest person in the room.It’s about where can you pitch in to add value to build long-term, sustainable,competitive advantage and value for this company. That’s it.I think the entrepreneurs have gotten the message from us that they need tochoose carefully and find good chemistry in choosing a CEO. Even in ourfirm sometimes entrepreneurs I meet I think the chemistry would be betterwith one of my other partners. So even there we really judge that as this[startup] is a great fit for our firm and something we want to invest in—who’sthe right partner here to shepherd it? And that again is something you have tolook for. We are equal partners here, so it makes it easy for us to do that. Ithink something important for entrepreneurs is they want to make sure thatthey’re getting the whole [venture capital] firm not just the partner. They wantto be able to trust their partners as confidants and build that relationship overtime. Mostly they want to maximize our value. They want to maximize myRolodex, my reach into the industry, the fact that we spend most of our timein the software industry versus in venture capital land. How would they leverage that? How can they leverage our other portfolio companies? So Ithink entrepreneurs are more sophisticated in really looking at the venturecapital relationship that they pick, and hopefully many of them get choices.And we’re hopeful that good ones choose us.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Very, very interesting. You listen to an entrepreneur’s presentation, and isthere a list of things that you’re ticking off in your mind about what you’relooking for to make this proposal a go? And is it pretty much the same list forany proposal? Or does it change with the proposal? Winblad: There is sort of a standard pitch in what you want to communicate to a venturecapitalist, but there’s not a standard entrepreneur. You’re first looking for theability of the founders to communicate their idea. Even if you don’t really likethe idea, are they great communicators? And they have to be, because they’regoing to have to raise money, recruit employees, sell software, communicateto analysts and the industry at large why they’re a big company. So if they’renot a good communicator, it’s a little hard for us. People have differentcommunication skills. A technical communicator might be less salesy than aperson who comes out of the sales ranks, and that’s fine. We’re not expectingeverybody to be an infomercial. But we’re expecting them to be passionatecommunicators. We’re also expecting them to have a strong sense of a big opportunity and beable to communicate that while diving down on their product. Unfortunately,we see a lot of really, really great product pitches. And we can’t fundproducts. We have to fund companies. So there’s a lot of pattern matching thatgoes on. At best we’re pattern matching—does this fit the pattern of a winner?[laughing] Does this look like somebody that is a first-round draft pick? WhenI was a young venture capitalist, I would say, “Would I go work there?” I askour young partner to think about that himself—would you go work there? Ifyou had to quit your job, would you think about working there? Does it seembig enough and interesting enough? It’s hard for me to ask that to myself rightnow, because I know I’m not going to quit this job and go work at a softwarecompany.[I ask myself:] What sense do I have of the competitive environment? Hownew is this? How breakthrough is it? Do I like it? Would I like to work withthis team? Because I’m going to work with them for five or six years. So all ofthose dynamics come in. Are my partners getting the same kind of mojo goingabout this? There’s a lot of pattern chemistry that comes into play. It’s not justtheir mouths are moving up there, and we don’t care what words come out,but there is some of that. And they have to be able to communicate scale.Even if we find, wow, that’s not going to be that big, we’d rather reel you in alittle bit than try to push you out to the opportunity. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Are all the partners there when something’s being pitched? Winblad: We’re all there when it’s being pitched.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And then you get your heads together afterwards and decide whether it’s a go? Winblad: Yes, and we have to achieve what we call a venture consensus, which meansthere are not strong naysayers and hopefully there are strong yeasayers.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: If there is a strong naysayer, can that kill the deal? Winblad: We’ll think twice about it, and it will likely kill the deal because we’reworried about our own lens, and we also know that companies aren’t perfect.We’ve now committed to spin straw into gold. That is a fairy tale, but we haveto do that. Along the way the spinning wheel breaks—you don’t want that onepartner coming in and saying, I told you so. Even if they don’t do that, youcan hear it coming. [laughter] So you want everybody to say, well, that was alittle bump in the road, or we’re going to have to slightly help this companychange course. You want everybody to grab an oar and to say yes, we allrooted for this company. Let’s keep going.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It must be exciting. Winblad: On most days it is. Sometimes it’s a different kind of excitement than youwant. [laughter] One thing to remember about software is the intellectualcapital trumps the financial capital all the time, so what happens when theintellectual capital is the most important; psychodrama? [singing] So there’s alot of stuff that happens there. The course I loved in school was business psychology. I remember we wereall being filmed, and we were given different roles. I got the card sayingyou’re going to get fired, and you’re going to cry. I was the only woman in theclass, and so the guys would tromp in one by one, and they would fire me, andI would burst into tears, and they would completely lose it and forget exactlywhat they were going to do. They even forgot that they were in class becausethey just couldn’t handle this. I remember how hard it was for them to fire me,because I said things like, “My livelihood depends on this. I have a family.”Well, I’ve had to go through that script many times [since]. And it is not easy.It is really hard to abstract yourself from the people that you’ve spent timewith. So the people skill things are something that— We are mostly nerds inthis industry. We’re nerdulent and tough businesspeople, and every day we have to work on are our nurturing skills, not our nerdulent skills, and reallyhelping really, really skilled people do their really hard jobs.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Really demanding stuff, isn’t it? Winblad: It’s much less demanding being the venture capitalist than the entrepreneur.And that is something that is really important to remember. I’m really gladthat I was an entrepreneur myself, so I know that my job now is so mucheasier.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is that because the entrepreneur’s whole stake is in this company that eitherhas to make it or not? Winblad: It could be that. They may have already made a ton of money. But they’remaking really hard decisions every day. The hours that these entrepreneurswork are unbelievable. The commitment that they have to make of theirphysical and intellectual stamina is extraordinary. Much greater than anyventure capitalist. They also have lives. They have families, friends, children,and they are really, really close to these people. Our job is only to hire and fireCEOs. Their job is to hire and fire every single executive in that company.And so the emotional strain that their job puts on them— They have to befiercely competitive and willing to win. They have to see the glass half fulljust like we do every single day. Every morning stand naked in front of themirror and know what their faults are. Our job is not nearly that brutal; it’sjust not.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: In both cases, the entrepreneur and the venture capitalist have a responsibilityto produce, to make a venture successful. You to the people who haveinvested in your fund and similarly— Winblad: Yes, our goals are aligned and should be aligned. They are shareholders in thecompany as well. Big wins have big results for these entrepreneurs as well,and also it sustains their livelihood as the companies grow. So for our goodcompanies, we see really tight alignment here. That alignment also requiresthe willingness to grow into large companies, and that takes time. That meansthe eye on the big prize, not the eye on the small prize. That’s why it’s so hardto find great CEOs that are willing to take the risk for the long game and thebig prize, because that’s the same prize that we have to keep our eye on. Atthe same time, good entrepreneurs also realize when that prize diminishes, andwhen we have to accept a silver or a bronze versus a gold medal, and thenhow we would work for that and make that successful outcome for everybodyand their careers. One of the things that we have to do as venture capitalists isalign all of our goals, otherwise it’s just an awful experience. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I think we have to wind up. Winblad: Yes we do, because I have four more minutes! [laughing]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I read and I can well believe after hearing you talk that you are considered apower broker of the industry. I don’t know whether you accept that willingly,but regardless of that, what are people thinking when they give a term like thatto a person, which isn’t done very often? Where does the power come from? Winblad: I’ll graciously accept that compliment only because I think more womenshould accept that they have some power. Power to me means that you havegained respect in your career, and that respect allows you to pick up thetelephone and walk into the circle of key decision-makers in your industry. [Itmeans] that you are consulted by those decision-makers on some of their corestrategies, that people recognize you—even when you are a competitor—as acollaborator to your industry, and that when they do reach out to you or youstep into that circle of big decisions, that you’re willing to state your opinionbased on your collective experience and knowledge, and that you’re not afraidto state it and that you’re not afraid for your opinion to be wrong. I thinkthat’s what power means. I think that experience gives you the courage tomake mistakes, and the courage and then the power to state your own opinion.My father always said one thing to me as the oldest child—I never hadcurfews, I never had rules, and when I would ask, “What should I do? Whattime should I be home?” I can remember asking this as a very young girl, andmy father said, “Ann, trust your own good judgment. I do.” And that told methat I had to build good judgment, and the only judgment I had to trust wasmy own.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Wonderful answer, wonderful interview. Winblad: Thank you.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And I thank you! Winblad: Thanks. 
Interviewer: Caroline Crawford and I are in a conference room at Wilson Sonsini Goodrich& Rosati. It is August 3, 2010, and we’re about to interview Lawrence R.“Larry” Sonsini. Would you like to get a glass of water before we start? Sonsini: I am going to get a cup of coffee. Will that disturb your video?Crawford: Not at all.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] We work with caffeine. Sonsini: So this is for The Bancroft Library?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: This is for The Bancroft Library. Pete Bancroft—do you know him? Sonsini: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: —very kindly funded three years of an oral history project on venture capital,which has been largely with the first generation in California—obviously notthe Rockefellers, that ilk. We’re in the third year and tailing off into peoplelike you who are very closely related, but not, I think, called a venturecapitalist, per se. Sonsini: That’s right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You should have gotten a letter about the process, but do you want me toquickly run through what happens? Sonsini: Sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, this interview is videotaped, obviously, and then it’s transcribed asliterally as possible. It comes to me; I look at it for accuracy. I don’t changefor content. Then the transcript goes to you for review and, hopefully,approval. At some stage, all the oral histories go up on a Bancroft Librarywebsite dedicated to venture capital.  Sonsini: Great. And the video is just archived?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: The video is archived. The idea is somewhere along the line we’ll have thecapacity to make the whole thing available. We do, even now, use video clipsevery once in a while. Sonsini: Okay, good.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I will ask questions, but you take them anywhere you like. I always start wayback, which in your case, I believe, is with your parents arriving on theseshores. Do you know why they left Italy? Sonsini: Well, it actually wasn’t my parents. It was my grandparents.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, it was your grandparents. All right. Sonsini: My grandparents came from Italy and settled in upstate New York, and that’swhere I was born and raised. But at a very early age, in 1949, my father, LarryP. Sonsini, got the idea that he wanted to get out of a small town in New York.It was Rome, New York. There wasn’t much there but an air force base andRevere Copper & Brass Company.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Where he was working? Sonsini: Yes. And he packed us up, I remember, in an old green Studebaker and droveacross country. He didn’t have a job, and we ended up in Los Angeles. Myfather went looking for work and went to work for <|endoftext|>
Interviewer Aircraft Companyin Culver City. He never went to college, neither did my mother, Mary, but hewas very entrepreneurial, very smart, dynamic, and he rose to the top of theorganization at what became <|endoftext|>
Interviewer Tool Company.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And what was he doing there? Sonsini: Well, he started out in what they call quality control and later really became incharge of all flight operations. I grew up with that atmosphere, and Igraduated from high school and went to Berkeley as an undergrad. From thereI thought I was going to practice medicine, but ended up going to Boalt HallSchool of Law. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why not medicine? Sonsini: Well, that’s a question that I keep asking myself. Why not?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] Because you’ve done so poorly in what you chose? [meantfacetiously] Sonsini: Yes, right, exactly. I think that I still have a passion for things medical andscientific. I love representing some of the life science companies we represent,because of that. But I think I got very excited with the atmosphere at Berkeleyand at the law school, the intellectual challenge and the broad menu that lawcan prepare you for. I graduated from law school [1966] obviously, and Ithought that I was going to head back East to work with one of the large NewYork firms, but—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because that was the thing to do? Sonsini: Because I wanted to be a corporate lawyer and what we call a securitieslawyer, a merger & acquisition lawyer, and most of that action was in the East.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But why that of all the kinds of law you could have chosen? Sonsini: Maybe it was something I learned from my father and his development inbusiness and his moving up through the <|endoftext|>
Interviewer organization. I worked at<|endoftext|>
Interviewer during the summers on the assembly lines, and business was a part ofthe dynamic in the family. I saw the possibility of representing differententerprises and the excitement in that. And so I was very fortunate. At the time, Silicon Valley wasn’t known asSilicon Valley, and my professor, a very fine man, Professor Richard [W.]Jennings, at Berkeley, told me that something interesting was happening downon the [San Francisco] Peninsula here. The only time I knew about thePeninsula was when— I played football and rugby at Cal, and we would comeover and play Stanford. And that’s the most exposure I had.There was a group of gentlemen, four of them, who had formed a veryinformal partnership, McCloskey, Wilson, Mosher & Martin, in 1961, and thiswas 1966. They excited me about the business plan they had, and that was torepresent young entrepreneurs and venture capitalists in building businesses,particularly in technology. No one was really doing that around here, andthere was no law firm that was really focused solely, as their business model,to do that. And they offered me great responsibility: “You’ll be our securities lawyer; you’ll be, at a very young age, on the front line.” And so I jumped atthat opportunity.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I can see why. Sonsini: As I look back, it was pretty risky, but that’s how we got started. ImmediatelyI started to get to know some of the fine, great, early entrepreneurs: BobNoyce, who invented the transistor and was a key factor at Fairchild and Intel;Gene Kleiner, who later formed Kleiner Perkins; and some of the very earlyventure capitalists, Tommy Davis and Art Rock, Don Lucas, Reid Dennis,Burt McMurtry—the list goes on and on.But it was a small club at the time, and it really was a very synergisticgrouping of entrepreneurs, venture capitalists, lawyers, accountants comingtogether to really build enterprises, funding them and helping grow them. Sovery early on, my practice was predominantly working with young startupcompanies, some that are still here today. I have a client today that was one ofmy first clients, so the company’s been with me for over forty-two years. It’s apublic company today. Coherent is its name.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Does that tend to be a pattern? That you keep clients? Sonsini: I’ve been very fortunate to keep my clients. The only time I lose them is whenthey decide to be bought or acquired or merged with somebody.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right, which you probably had something to do with. Sonsini: I do a lot of that.So in the early days, as I look back, we were beginning to formulate thetemplate for financing and growing technology enterprises.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was any other law firm headed in this direction in the mid-sixties? Sonsini: There were other law firms that were doing the work, but there was no onebased here that had that as their central business model. And so we startedrepresenting these companies, and of course, we were able to grow with thetechnology. During the seventies, late sixties, it was all about semiconductors.Silicon Valley started to get its name as Silicon Valley because of the siliconwafer that that transistors are built upon. We went through various inflectionpoints, and we really worked very closely with the early venture capitalists,developing, as I say, the investing template: how to put money together, how to value it, how to incentivize employees and make the company an attractiveplace to come to work, and how to grow it. As these companies got bigger, westarted to add more legal disciplines in our law firm, and it started to growbigger.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What do you mean by legal discipline? Sonsini: A litigation department, a tax department, an employee benefits department, atechnology department.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, I see. Sonsini: So as the needs of these startup companies broadened, they needed lawyers ofdifferent expertise, and we started to build a firm to meet those challenges.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So it’s a very reciprocal sort of— Sonsini: A very reciprocal thing. So early on, I was given the task to develop thestrategy of the firm. I remember in the 1970s making the decision that wereally wanted to build a full-service law firm, devoted to representing thetechnology or growth enterprise, and that we would have the legal talent anddisciplines that addressed at least 80 percent of the legal problems andbusiness problems that a growing business would need. And that’s how westarted to expand the firm.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You were also seeing a lacuna that you could fill, were you not? The moreestablished firms, I imagine, didn’t have the range of expertise that you weredeveloping. Sonsini: That’s correct, that’s correct. For example, we were one of the first firms tobuild technology departments of PhDs and others with advanced degrees whounderstood the technology and would focus upon technology problems:licensing, distribution of product, intellectual property protection, intellectualproperty litigation—all of the elements around technology. And as theseclients grew, they needed more access to capital, and they outgrew venturecapital. They needed access to more institutional capital and access to thepublic markets. So very early on—and this is one of the things that excited meand brought me to the firm—is I wanted to really be involved in a lot of thepublic finance and working with the capital markets taking companies public.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: These were ideas that you had as a young attorney starting out?  Sonsini: Yes, almost from the start. I think one of the benefits of being a securitieslawyer— What happened at law school is Professor Jennings asked me to behis research assistant for his textbook on securities regulation. I would do a lotof the case research for him, and it got me into the whole problem-solving ofthe issues involved in the capital markets and in mergers. And then I wasreally able, at an early age in the business, to see the growth of this legalpractice. Fortunately, I went on to takeover his classes, and I taught securitieslaw for twenty-five years at Berkeley at Boalt and contributed to the book. Soit was a passion that I had.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I can see that. Sonsini: And an expertise I worked hard at.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It sounds as though you do give him some credit for pointing you in a certaindirection. Sonsini: I certainly do. I give a lot of people credit. I give, certainly, Dick Jenningscredit for opening my eyes to the possibility here, and then a lot goes to myearly mentors, John Wilson and Roger Mosher. There was also PeteMcCloskey. But Pete McCloskey left very early to run for Congress, in 1968,I believe. He ran against Shirley Temple [Black] and became a politician. Hewas a very inspirationally driven man. It was part of the recipe of the earlydays of the firm. We had some dynamic personalities. You had PeteMcCloskey, former district attorney, trial lawyer, very politically active,running for Congress. You had Roger Mosher, graduated from Stanford, verysavvy in business. And then you had John Wilson, a true gentleman and scholar and mentor, whocame out of the East Coast, went to Princeton and then Yale, worked for thegovernment in the early days of the Atomic Energy Commission. WhenWilson came West, he went to work for a company that became a client,Hiller Helicopters. Ironically, Hiller Helicopters was the competitor to <|endoftext|>
InterviewerTool Company where my father was in business. One of the leaders of HillerHelicopters, a gentleman named Ed Bolton, was somewhat my dad’scounterpart at <|endoftext|>
Interviewer Tool because both of them made helicopters.Ultimately, <|endoftext|>
Interviewer Tool won the Apache contract that put helicopters inVietnam. But what’s interesting is Ed Bolton later became a client of mine,and he started a couple of companies. So John Wilson was just a man of greatintegrity and ethics and character, and that added balance. I was very fortunate to be put into this environment with wonderful mentors—talented, smart, visionary people. And it’s rare that you’d find threeentrepreneurial people like that in this area. The big challenge was where to go with the firm, and my vision was I wantedto build a national law firm. I wanted to be able to serve these startupcompanies even when they became multi-billion-dollar, public, globalenterprises. And of course, that’s what happened. And I think today we areprobably the most dominant brand in the legal business serving growth andtechnology enterprises of all sizes. We today represent over three thousandprivate companies and over three hundred public companies. I have reallycontinued all this time to be devoted to this growing client base, and at thesame time, even today, developing the strategy for the growth of the law firm.The issues I face today are more challenging because the world is morechallenging. But we’re still growing, opening up offices in China, and now wehave eight offices throughout the United States, and we’re adapting to thisever-growing model of technology enterprises.The wonderful thing about this, notwithstanding the tremendous complexityof it all, venture capital is still key to starting the new companies, even today.And we are doing it the same way we did it back in the 1960s really, the sametype of investment structure, addressing the same type of issues. And we’vehad wonderful successes. I’ve been very fortunate with wonderful successes,so the recipe really hasn’t changed that much. What’s changed is the scale andthe pace of scale to build real companies, and of course, we’ve had some verybig companies. Take Google—I remember when I met with Larry Page andSergey Brin, two Stanford students, one Saturday in my office, who said theywanted to start a company, and they wanted to call it Google. I thought, youcan’t name a company Google. Well, now it’s a verb, and that’s part of theexcitement of all this.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You got to where you’ve gotten, and you did it very well and verysuccessfully, but there must have been a steep learning curve even forsomebody of your background. You must have had to figure out where thefirm that you were so interested in building could fit in and be of service. Sonsini: Well, very early on, we began to realize that the pathway to take was reallydefined by where the client [the company] wanted to get to, as opposed to weleading the direction. And this was the wisdom of John Wilson. John Wilsonhad a simple saying, “Follow the client. When in doubt about investing in ourbusiness, ask yourself what are the needs of the client.” And that is somethingI never forgot and followed entirely. So we develop close relationships withthe clients, and that was a characteristic of the business then, and it hasremained a characteristic.It was a very relationship-driven business for the venture capital firm and forour law firm and for the entrepreneur. It was a symbiotic relationship, wherethere were no adversaries at the table. We were all partners, even though Iwould represent the company negotiating against the venture capitalists on their investment. There were rules of understanding about that, that we had acommon objective, and the objective was to put a structure together thatwould enable this enterprise to scale. So certain principles developed: followthe client, it will tell us where to go. So as clients had patent problems orintellectual property problems or tax problems, we added the expertise andstarted to grow with them. And yes, there were challenges all the time, about how fast to grow, how riskyis it, the competitiveness of the environment, how to work in an integratedway, how to be economically efficient—all those challenges of building abusiness. And there were difficult times. We ran into recessions. In 1974, forexample, we ran into problems in the capital markets. But all of that was noisearound this objective to build the enterprise.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That, I imagine, is not the objective of a conservative East Coast law firm. Sonsini: That’s right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: They might be engaged, but they don’t stick with the company. Sonsini: I often explain it this way: I think that when we got started, we weredeveloping what we call vertical relationships, where we would haveattorneys work on the relationship with the client and grow with it. Ahorizontal model is, you don’t work on relationships; you just work on anexpertise. So someone may say, “I’m a merger & acquisition lawyer, so onlycall me when you have a merger & acquisition problem.” Now, that was theproblem for that New York model to address this industry. However, thechallenge—and my biggest challenge—was as these companies got biggerand got public, the horizontal model was very much needed because therelationships became less important. Now you had public boards of directors;you had internal general counsels. These companies brought all of thesedisciplines internally, and now they looked to you for expertise in areas thatthey needed. So as companies grew, relationships diminished, and expertiseand skills became paramount. And the challenge was to build a law firm thatcould do both.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, you have to, don’t you? Sonsini: You have to, otherwise the client outgrows you. I think the biggestcontribution I made, besides getting caught up in the vision, was— It wasimperative for me not to have the client outgrow me. It was a passion.Because, remember, I was thinking of going to New York to be with those law firms and represent great problems and great enterprises, and I wasn’t going togive that up. So the issue was, could you develop a law firm in time, a one-generation lawfirm, in which you could build that scale. We are approaching our fiftiethanniversary, and I’m approaching my forty-fifth anniversary, and if there’sone major achievement, it’s the ability to make that transition and still berepresenting the entrepreneur in a private company today using that same oldventure capital model, and yet to be able to do work for a Google or aHewlett-Packard or some of these great big public companies we represent,and to do both. I myself have transformed what I do. I do less venture work. I used to do it100 percent. Now I do it maybe 10-15 percent and spend my time mostly witha large public company on corporate governance, corporate finance, mergers& acquisitions, regulatory matters and the like.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is that because that’s where your expertise is? Sonsini: I think it’s where my passion is, where my expertise is, where my best valueadd is. But that is what’s unique about Wilson Sonsini.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It also explains, perhaps, why the firm employs so many attorneys. Isn’t it sixhundred plus? Sonsini: Exactly, exactly.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Smart as you are, you can’t be doing it all! [laughing] Sonsini: No, you can’t. In order to work that business plan, you have to scale; you haveto grow. So yes, we are over six hundred lawyers and growing.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: In the early days, it might have been difficult to find an attorney who wouldcome to this sort of a company. Sonsini: You’re right on. A great observation. I think one of the biggest challenges was,in order to do this in a single generation, you couldn’t grow it organically.You had to go attract experienced lawyers who had good jobs and weresuccesses and have them come in and buy into this model with this high-riskventure. I spent so much of my time in recruiting, and we grew the firm bothways, hiring lawyers out of law schools like Berkeley and Stanford andHarvard, and at the same time attracting lawyers out of many of the New York firms. We grew the firm that way. And many of my most talented lawyerscame from very fine New York and San Francisco and Chicago law firms.Because you can’t do this in one generation. It’s very hard.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And you might not be able to do it in another region either. Is proximity partof it? The fact that you are here where it’s happening? Sonsini: I think that’s true too. I think that sometimes being in the right place at theright time makes many business plans very successful. And certainly that wasthe case. So the atmospherics were right. What were the atmospherics or theculture of Silicon Valley as it became? Well, it was a merit-based system, ameritocracy. It really didn’t matter where you went to school, where you grewup, what your religion was, or your background. What mattered wasperformance. Secondly, failure is not a stigma. It’s an experience, a uniquecharacteristic of the entrepreneurialism, not only of the Valley, of this country,that we can’t lose sight of. It’s a differentiator. The support systems of venturecapitalists here with capital, with banks here who buy into it, and acommunity. The universities, Stanford, California, being right here with greatresearch departments and great professors developing all this talent. Greatcompanies—Hewlett-Packard was here, Fairchild Semiconductor, IBM—abreeding ground for management. So you had to have all the right elements,and those elements came together, and that became Silicon Valley. Now, I remember in the early days people used to say, well, Silicon Valleywill mature and grow old. But what happened is the recipe was the key thing,not the geography. And so Silicon Valley really became a concept that manypeople are trying to duplicate, not a place. And that’s part of what happened.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, one reads a lot about the Silicon Alleys and thises and thatses around theplanet, none of which quite duplicate the original Silicon Valley. I guessbecause so many different ingredients make up a culture, and they’re going inin different mixes, inevitably each is going to turn out differently. Sonsini: This is very true. I have been asked to speak in many places, Europe, Asia, inthe United States, about how to replicate Silicon Valley. And we all know theelements of the recipe. I kind of outlined them. But it’s the proportions of thebrew that is the secret.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And the individuals. Sonsini: And the individuals. Quite frankly, no one has been able to duplicate it as well,and it still is growing, which is astounding to people. But it’s being slowlyabsorbed and adopted in many places. If I look at the entrepreneurial culture in China, for example, I see many similarities. But some cultures were notadaptable. Japan and Europe really never bought into some of the elements.Business failure is a stigma in so many cultures, not in the United States. Thelateral movement of employees here, the idea that you go to work for HewlettPackard and in a couple of years leave to start up a company.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you were in the right place at the right time. I think there is somethingabout the time that you entered—the mid-sixties when things were ready to go. Sonsini: There is. No doubt about it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So there’s an element of luck involved. Sonsini: There is. I have been very fortunate. Timing has been a major factor.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What was the legal profession thinking of you in those early days? Sonsini: [laughing] Well, I think, because of the culture that John Wilson had ofintegrity and ethics—and we were always respected—I think the attitude was,can you really grow it? It’s very hard. And I think people doubted that youwould be able to scale the firm, and so the competition would say, “Yes,they’re very good working with the entrepreneur. But as you get biggerproblems as you grow bigger, they don’t have this, they don’t have that.” So itwas always what we didn’t have. Of course, part of growing the business wasgetting what we needed.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Who was the competition in the early days? Sonsini: It was mainly in the early days firms here on the West Coast, mainly in SanFrancisco, firms like Pillsbury Madison & Sutro (that was the name at thetime), Brobeck Phleger and Harrison, Cooley Godward.As technology became so important to the economics of this country, and asSilicon Valley became more powerful and the businesses grew, thecompetition changed. It was from the East, where the New York firms cameand opened up offices here. And so the legal services expand with externalcompetition coming in.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did the West Coast offices of the eastern firms pick up aspects of the modelyou describe?  Sonsini: They picked up aspects. Some tried to duplicate it, but no one really has. Butmany of them brought in layers of horizontal expertise to compete, and that’swhat we deal with.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I read of your three circles concept. Sonsini: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You follow a firm through its trajectory, developing the expertise as it’sneeded? Sonsini: Yes. That is the model that no one has been able quite to replicate.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And the three circles are what? Sonsini: The three circles is something I came up with to describe this business model.The first circle was serving the entrepreneur and venture capital industry, thestartup company, the early-stage enterprise. As that enterprise grew, it reachedan inflection point that moved it into the second circle, and the second circle isabout the company becoming a public enterprise. And the disciplines changed,the legal disciplines that you needed to take it public and then to serve it. Thethird circle is when the enterprise broke through to be a multi-billion dollarglobal company. Its needs changed again. We wanted to build a law firm thatcould service this enterprise in each of those stages of growth. But as theygrew, moving from the first circle, where you did not need a lot of legal talent,to that third circle, where every legal problem in the world is present, youexpand the law firm to serve the mature enterprise.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: In those early days when you started, I imagine you were dealing with naïveentrepreneurs who knew next to nothing about building a company. Maybethat’s less true now with practically every scientist I know having some sort ofan industrial connection. But in those days that was not so true. So did youprovide quite a bit of education/advice, not just in the legal area, but also inthe business area? Sonsini: Very much so. The firm’s business was really characterized by a lot ofbusiness advice. And that was the unique aspect. Why I love this practice somuch is because I love the business side of it, being a businessperson, dealingwith business problems, and using legal solutions as only a means to solvebusiness problems. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Very interesting. Sonsini: And that is the lawyer I became, and the kind of lawyers we’ve built here. Ofcourse, that is still relevant today, but it’s different. With this wonderfulInternet, knowledge is ubiquitous, and you have all these opencommunications, and you have so much touching base with people all overthe world instantly. Knowledge is everywhere, and it changes that model,because the entrepreneur today is still naïve in building a business but has somuch information available. So now it’s a question of filtering information aswell as providing business solutions.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you find, in general, that entrepreneurs listen to you seriously? Sonsini: I think so. I’ve seen enough things that I think they haven’t seen.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: In the early days was it a problem for you, a young, wet-behind-the-earsattorney? Sonsini: Yes, of course. But that was part of growing up and maturing and developingsome wonderful relationships with people who took me along.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You mentioned at the beginning a number of early venture capitalists. Wasthere any tendency to work with one partnership rather than another? Sonsini: Not really.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Or, I’m dealing with a semiconductor company so I should go to KleinerPerkins [Caufield & Byers]—anything that steered you in one direction oranother when it came to venture capital? Sonsini: No, in the early days there weren’t that many venture capital firms, so youdidn’t have a big menu. But then as the industry grew, and they became morediversified, many of the firms started to develop particular domain expertise—life sciences, semiconductor—that led you to select that way. But you know,the venture capital industry never got that big, so the unique thing is you dealtwith most of the firms.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: In the early days, you must have learned where people’s expertise lay, whomyou trusted, people’s track record, in a way that I imagine, with everything somuch larger now, it’s harder to know individuals and their history. Does that influence in any way your decisions about who you are going to deal withwhen you’re setting up a company? Sonsini: Well, very much so. The landscape has gotten more sophisticated, morespecialized, the business challenges are tougher in many respects. They’reglobal, competition is severe, access to capital is different. You need morecapital. So certainly, you migrate towards talent and expertise and judgment.Relationship is a nice thing to have, but it’s not at the level that it was. But,once you do have those disciplines in place, the relationships grow, becauseyou still need relationships to build enterprises. You still need the ability tocommunicate, to share views, to dialogue—now it’s just a more complicated,more sophisticated, a more knowledgeable game.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Would you be less likely to deal with an enterprise if you felt that theindividuals involved were not going to cooperate with you? Sonsini: You know, my filter now is— The most important thing initially is theintegrity and ethics of the individual. I don’t try to make a judgment whetherthis business is going to be successful or not to take it as a client.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, you don’t? Sonsini: No, because business is too hit or miss. You never know if a Google is goingto become a Google. I just got a call today from a couple of people that wantto start a company. I have no idea whether it’s going to be successful, but Idon’t even care. What I care about is, do they have the integrity and ethics toreally do the right thing? Are they committed? Are they excited with their idea?And if it gets to that stage, then I’ll start to work with them.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now that seems a little different than the way a venture capitalist wouldapproach it, because he/she is dealing with other people’s money, right? Sonsini: Exactly. Now the venture capitalist will probably begin the same way I do.But they’ll have to take it a step further, because they are managing someoneelse’s money. They are a fiduciary, so they have to be totally committed thatthe business plan may be a success. So they take it to a different level.Now, I spend a lot of time making those judgments too, because when thesepeople come to me and ask me to help them get funded, that’s when I start tomake a judgment on the business plan, not because I’m any expert, but beforeI recommend them to a Sequoia, or an NEA [New Enterprises Associates], ora Kleiner Perkins, I have to have some sense that there’s something here for them to look at. They’ll make the judgment better than I, but they’ll know thatI’ve gone through at least a filter. And I think that’s why a lot of people comehere not only for the legal expertise but for that filter.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. And they know that. Sonsini: And they know that. And of course, if it’s a totally oddball idea that I think isway out there, I’ll turn it down of course. But I don’t do what the venturecapitalist has to do, and that is really drill down into the technology, into themarkets, into the competition, into the return. That’s their job. That’s whatthey do.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That’s an interesting distinction. Now where did I read this? Your choice has always been the company interms of representation, rather than representing the venture capitalpartnership or the investment banker. Is that all part of your concentration onthe company itself—that wanting to build it, at least in a structural/legal way? Sonsini: Yes. The presumption is to represent the enterprise, the company. But in orderto do that with experience and judgment, we also represent the venturecapitalists, the investment bankers, where we’re not conflicted. That isimportant, because you need to know all sides of the equation. So we do a lotof work for the venture capital firms when they’re investing, and we don’trepresent the company. We represent some of the finest investment bankingfirms, the Goldman Sachs, Morgan Stanleys, the J.P. Morgans, et al. of theworld, where we are not company counsel. But our preference is to becompany counsel, but we can’t represent everybody. So when we don’t, andthey’re represented by someone else, we often will be on the side representingthe venture capitalist, and the investment banking firm, and the private equityfirm. That’s a large part of what we do.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But is the largest part still representation of the company? Sonsini: Yes. The largest part is representing what we call the enterprise, the company.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because that’s your preference? Sonsini: That’s the business plan, and that’s where I think the excitement andrelationships are, because when you represent a venture capitalist, it’s for atransaction. When you represent a company, it’s for all seasons, you growwith it, and there’s where the challenge and expertise and excitement is. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I have to look at my notes. Anything more to say about competitors? Youmentioned Brobeck. What about Ware Freidenrich and Latham & Watkins?When do they come in? Sonsini: Well, Ware & Freidenrich was here early. They were one of the earliercompetitors. They later got acquired and merged and became a part of abigger firm. Latham & Watkins is a wonderful law firm that has grown into agreat success, but their business model in the early days was not my businessmodel. It was a different business model. It was more of a New York modeland, of course, that’s why they are big in New York and around the world.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Meaning that they didn’t have the three circles idea? Sonsini: Right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was Latham’s a deliberate choice not to be a Wilson Sonsini? Sonsini: I don’t know. You’ll have to ask them.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you adopting anything from anybody else? From the other law firmsthat gradually come into the Valley? Or at least focused on the Valley? Sonsini: You mean during the early days?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Any time. Sonsini: I learned a lot from many firms, of course. Don’t forget, I was starting out as ayoung lawyer, and I’ve only had one job professionally, and I’ve only been inone place, and so I’ve learned a lot from a lot of great lawyers. Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Thinking back to the struggling startup, particularly as you gained inreputation in the Valley, how could a startup afford you? Sonsini: Well, the fees were very low and always have been in venture capital.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: For that very reason.  Sonsini: For that very reason, and probably one of the reasons why many of the big,large New York firms didn’t adopt the model.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Not enough money in it. Sonsini: It’s the economics. But you see, we were able to build up the base of clients,so when they got bigger and public, the legal work funded the growth and therisk of taking on the young client. And of course, we were so small—therewere four or five of us when we got started, and so we didn’t need manysuccesses to keep our firm going. So the flywheel of the three circles provesthe economics. It would be very hard to come into the business—and I thinkthat’s why many firms have a tough time competing with us—with a big costinfrastructure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Even today? Sonsini: Even today. Even today, I think that we don’t make a lot of money on ourstartups.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why do you bother then? Sonsini: Because they become Googles! [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What becomes WS Investments? You have to carry it here, because I reallyam weak in this area. Sonsini: WS Investments is a partnership of the partners in the firm, where we set abudget, and we invest in startup companies only at the very early stage, andwe average maybe less than $100,000 in the company. The reason why we didWS Investments is when we were starting to grow the [Wilson Sonsini] firm,we began to realize that these investment opportunities came to the corporatelawyers working with the venture capital firms. But remember I said in orderto build a full-service firm, I needed more than corporate lawyers. I neededlitigators, tax lawyers, I needed technology lawyers, merger & acquisitionlawyers, anti-trust lawyers—the list goes on. And they would not see theopportunity [for investment], and that, to me, created an unfairness. Whyshould the corporate people get the opportunity to invest and not the otherpartners who are going to be very important to the success of this enterprise?So we adopted a rule: no one gets to invest personally. What we do is, we’llset up a partnership which we all share in pro rata, and that’s the investmentopportunity. And that was WS Investments. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. When was it started? Sonsini: I would say we started it in the late seventies.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Really! Early on then.[End Audio File 1]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Done Deals: [Venture Capitalists Tell Their Stories] contains an interviewwith you. The interviewer asked whether lawyers are too close to the venturecapital business, and, I would add, to this investment partnership as well. Isthere a conflict of interest somewhere in having these very close financial andbusiness relations? Sonsini: Not the way we run it and the way we think about it. First of all, on theinvestment side: we take a very small investment, purposefully, so that we donot have a significant or material equity position in any company, and wedon’t have a lot of dollars at work. And I think that we’ve been able tomanage that. And the fact that it is not a decision of the individual lawyer, butwe have a special committee that makes the investment decision, and it’sautomatic and mandatory, we think puts in the systems that really protectclient interests and attorney-client ethics and integrity. And many firms havedone this in different forms.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So when you began WS Investments in the late seventies, if indeed that iswhen it was, was it commonplace in the legal profession? Sonsini: No, not necessarily common in the legal profession. It was not unusual here.Many of the firms had different kinds of policies. I believe Brobeck had nopolicy that allowed lawyers to invest individually. Other firms had differentpolicies. So it’s been proven. I actually think it started in the early seventies,not the late seventies. It’s been around. And over time, we’ve been reasonablysuccessful with it. It has its ups and downs. The budget has never grown withthe size of the firm, necessarily. So that really hasn’t posed a problem. The other issue, about being too close to the venture capitalists or too close tothe client, that really isn’t a problem either. These are all intelligent people,and you are building a partnership designed to build a successful business.And it’s important that you have conflict policies. It’s important that you have rules and procedures, that you have appropriate disclosure of relationships,that you have waivers of conflicts. So we have a system here. We have alawyer who is a full-time, in-house general counsel to manage those issues.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Does that go back a ways? Sonsini: It goes back a long ways.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That you had a person. Sonsini: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I read that you have a reputation for being very ethical. Sonsini: That’s always been an important thing to me. In this business you really haveonly a couple of things: one, you have your integrity and then yourjudgment—and then maybe a third, your experience. So integrity, judgment,and experience are really what you’re selling. Some people say you have anetwork, some people say you have access to certain things—maybe on themargin. But the most important thing is the ethics, the integrity, thejudgment—and that’s what you’re selling in this business.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, that leads to the question of culture, which I imagine has been anevolving thing. But could you characterize the culture of Wilson Sonsini? Andsay how it might be different from anybody else? Sonsini: Yes. Culture is a big thing to me and to the firm. And it has many elements.We talk about it all the time and have really built the firm on the basis of it.One element of it is diversity. I believe strongly in diversity. We have beenranked as recently, I think, as last year as the number one firm in the countryamong all law firms, as the number one firm leading in diversity.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Diversity in the widest sense? Sonsini: In the widest sense—ethnicity, gender, color, creed. And it’s very important.We have to keep working at it. I wish we had more women partners, forexample. But I think we have a very diverse group—that’s important. 20 A second culture is consensus building. I believe very much in consensusmanagement. That is to say, a very transparent business plan where peoplereally commit to the vision of the firm.The third principle is one of high integrity and ethics. You can’t reallyrepresent an enterprise with all these multiple relationships without beinghighly respected, because you want people to trust you with major businessdecisions. And without that trust, you’re not going to be really solving theproblems. You’re not going to know the problems. So trust is critical.Another culture element is meritocracy. Our compensation is not lockstep.There’s no such thing as tenure. It’s all based upon performance and quality ofwork.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How would you judge quality of work? Sonsini: Well, we spend a lot of time talking about it and evaluating it ourselves.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So it’s not just a matter of deals and money brought in? Sonsini: No, it’s a potpourri of issues.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Can you give me an idea, when you and your partners are sitting around thetable, of the sort of things that you would be looking at? Sonsini: We look at the feedback from the client base, reputation in the market,productivity, quality of growth, ability to mentor others, leadership—thosekinds of qualities that all law firms at some level do. So these are the cultural aspects, which were very important to me. I learnedvery early on that you have to have a vision that you can articulate. And thenyou needed a culture to marry that vision. And then you wanted to stay reallyflexible to adapt to change. Those are the principles I was fortunate to learnvery early. I probably learned from others—I don’t know how those thingscame to me, but I think those are the elements. Because if you have a vision,then people really can get on the same page, otherwise there’s chaos. And it’svery hard to have a culture with confusion and chaos.And then the other thing is the adaptability to change, because if there’s onething I’ve learned, it is that everything is going to change. There’s theunpredictability of it all. You have to get comfortable with that. Sometimesit’s scary, but it’s a very unpredictable world. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Can you get comfortable with change? A person who likes things precise, Iimagine! Sonsini: It’s always a personal dilemma for me. That’s why I wake up at four o’clockin the morning some days of the week. Sure, you want control. You want to bein control. You want to seek perfection.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, there are two things that occur to me as you describe the culture. I readthat at one point Wilson Sonsini had eight hundred-plus attorneys. Sonsini: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How can you possibly instill a unifying culture with an organization that large? Sonsini: Boy, that was hard. That was before the dot-com bubble burst. That was in thebull market of all bull markets—1998-99.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, tell me about all that. Sonsini: Oh, it was a phenomenal time and a scary time.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You probably lost some control, didn’t you? Sonsini: We did. It was too hectic, too busy. In 1999 we, I think, were involved inmore than 120 public offerings. We grew to 820 lawyers; today we’re 620. Itwas a time of a lot of excess, a time when capital was available to anybusiness, a time when we were taking companies public that were two yearsold. Of course, it couldn’t last, and it all came crashing down.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you predict that at some level? Sonsini: No, I didn’t predict it. I worried about it because I was obviously running thefirm and saw this tremendous growth and saw that it was hard to pay attentionto allocate resources; it was hard to mentor associates; it was hard. And itcreated enormous business challenges.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you trying to take steps to somehow rein it in? Or was it beyond all that?  Sonsini: Oh yes. We were trying to decide what business to take and what business toturn away, how to share resources by using outsourcing, contract attorneys, allsorts of things.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And now that you have shrunk to 620, that’s manageable? Sonsini: Oh yes. It is, and of course we have evolved our management structure. That’swhat you have to look for—you have to come out of the storm, not only alive,but you’ve got to come out with some learning. So we changed ourmanagement structure. There was a lot of issues in the firm about— I wasvery much a major business-getter, and I was chairman, and I was CEO, and Isuppose people called me a founder. How can you build a business with somuch concentration? You need succession, and yet I wasn’t going anywhere.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [laughing] I’ll bet you weren’t. Sonsini: I’m one of these people who wants to keep going in what I do and keep going.We had to change. And we did. We put in a full-time CEO—one of mypartners. John [V.] Roos became CEO, and we proved it could work. I provedthat I could let go and have only one person report as opposed to ten. Heproved that he could manage with me, and lo and behold he is now theambassador to Japan. He was appointed a year ago, and so now we haveanother CEO, Steve [Steven E.] Bochner, and he is now developing hisadministration. I think that this has been an enormous plus for the firm, thatpeople look at the institution and say okay, we see the success. We see it’s afirst-generation firm. The big challenge—one of the big challenges—is, can ithave succession? Can there be leadership after the original group? And I’mthe only one left out of the original group. I think that we’re proving that aswe go, and I think that was a necessity that came out of all of that growth.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Are the people at the top appreciative of the continuity? The continuity andchange I guess would be the two things, wouldn’t they? Sonsini: Very much so. I think people are very excited about it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So are you now just solely Larry Sonsini, partner? Sonsini: No, I’m still chairman.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, you’re chairman, so you still have quite a say.  Sonsini: I focus primarily on the strategic direction of the firm, the culture of the firm,the business model of the firm, and I step out of day-to-day operations.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is that a pleasure? Sonsini: I think it is. I think it comes natural to me. It’s always a challenge. Yes, it is apleasure. I feel a sense of responsibility, but also I think it’s a good use of mytalent at this particular time.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: This next question goes back in time. In 1978 the firm was renamed. Is that assimple as you lost McCloskey? Or was there a reorientation? Sonsini: I think 1978 was a bit of an inflection point when we split with Roger Mosher,a name partner, very fine lawyer and person, a mentor of mine along withJohn Wilson. It was a very difficult thing for me because I was caughtbetween the two of them. And I think that we had a disagreement on where togo, too. I think that John and I wanted to build a national, global law firm. Ithink Roger was more cautious about that and more concerned and probablynot as in tune with the changes that had to be made to do that. So we agreed todisagree and split the firm, and it was a difficult thing. You learn from that.And that’s when the firm, I think, really started to take off. That’s when Johnreally put me in the position of leadership of the firm as a young lawyer, andwhen I started really to develop the model and build the firm. So yes, it was avery important time.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So how old were you then? We must be the same age, because I was in thesame class as you at Berkeley. [chuckling] Sonsini: Yes, so I was born in 1941.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So forty-one from seventy-eight is thirty-seven. Sonsini: It’s thirty-seven years old.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That seems young. Sonsini: Why, looking back, it seems young! [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: To all of us in this room!  Sonsini: At the time I wasn’t young at all.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But none of this phased you? Have you ever had doubts? Sonsini: [pause to think] I never had doubt about the commitment and the direction andthe principles. There was always doubt about execution, right? There are fearsthat you have to face, challenges. But no. I think part of that was the Valleyand the momentum. It wouldn’t let you quit. [laughing] The relationships Ihad, the clients that I could talk to— I was growing businesses alongside ofpeople who were my age, entrepreneurs. We would get together and talk aboutour businesses, and we’d learn that a lot of our problems we had in common.So there was an infrastructure there to rely upon that I didn’t even knowbefore, and that was the beauty of it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You were all venturers, in a sense. Sonsini: We were all entrepreneurs; we were growing up together.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It must have been an exciting time. Sonsini: Very exciting. It’s still exciting. It’s exciting today. The problems are different.These are very challenging times. This last decade has been a brutal decade.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, talk about that a little, and how Wilson Sonsini might have made somechanges because of the external circumstance. Sonsini: I think through the sixties, seventies, eighties, and nineties, we were almost onautomatic pilot. Technology was changing in each decade—semiconductors inthe seventies, computers in the eighties, software, life sciences, the Internet.And it was all about blocking and tackling and staying committed, buildingculture, staying true to the vision. Along comes this decade—2000, and things change dramatically. You havethe dot-com bubble burst. The Dow greatly declines. NASDAQ goes from5,000-plus down to 2,500. Everything comes to a halt. We were said to haveled the nation in public offerings in 1999 with over 120; I think we led thenation in the year 2000 with six. A dramatic change. And then 9/11 comesalong a year later, shakes the momentum of the nation. We start to build back,and then we run into the biggest recession since the Depression, that we’restarting to come out of, and in the middle of it we have a war that’s still going on. We have the globalization of technology—other nations, China, Russia,Brazil, Israel, India, and others growing rapidly and competing.So this decade has been very, very challenging. It’s a decade where venturecapital has shrunk. The venture capital industry is having its worst decade inits history. The financial markets have returned in this decade less money thanany decade in our history, even lower than the decade following theDepression. This has been a daunting time. I’m very proud that we continue tothrive and represent great enterprises and have grown technology through allof that, but it’s changing who we are. It’s challenging us. How global do webecome? We have an office in Shanghai and have been debating Hong Kong,Beijing, Israel, India. Those are tough questions. Our East Coast offices areexpanding. Does our business model have to adapt and change again whenyou enter those markets?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: The answer would be yes, right? Sonsini: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But how? Sonsini: How. It’s a phenomenal story as we go into the next half century of this firm’shistory, and of course the leadership is going to change too.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is there an attempt to disseminate the Wilson Sonsini culture to all thesedifferent offices? Sonsini: Oh, absolutely. As long as I’m here there’s going to be an attempt.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: We should draw this to a close, but I want first to find a statement from theAmerican Lawyer. It is an allegation that Wilson Sonsini has never brokeninto the New York establishment “club”. Do you care? Have you tried? Hasthat been a goal? Sonsini: We are committed to building out our New York office. We have over fortylawyers there now, and our Washington DC office is a very successful office.It’s not the New York club that I aspire to, but it’s to be able to represent theenterprises and the capital market players in the leading financial center of the December 2005. world. I don’t have it totally figured out, to be honest with you. We’ve gotsome wonderful talent, and we’re doing well, but that is a big market, andwe’re going to have to scale it. It’s going to have to get bigger, and that’s amajor priority.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: A bigger market and different companies, right? Sonsini: Bigger market, different companies, different game, different competitors.Yes—it’s a major priority of ours.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But a very difficult one, I should think. Sonsini: It’s a difficult one, we’re in the middle of it right now, studying it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Does your name and reputation from what you’ve done here help you? Sonsini: Oh, very much so.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: The East Coast people don’t say, oh those techie guys, they don’t do the kindof law that we do. Sonsini: No, I think that we’ve gone well beyond that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, we haven’t talked about your involvement with the New York StockExchange. Do you want to say a word about that? Sonsini: Well, I’m very proud of the fact that I was a member of the board of the NewYork Stock Exchange, and I’ve chaired a number of its committees andcontinue to chair a committee. I chair the Commission on CorporateGovernance.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did the president create that? Sonsini: It was created by the chairman/CEO of the New York Stock Exchange and theboard. So that is something I’m proud of. It’s something I take very seriously.It’s a very important institution in this country. And I take that responsibilityreally to heart. I think it’s a credit to the firm that we’re three thousand milesaway, but given our experience and our judgment and our integrity, that wecan add value to that institution.  So no, I think that New York would properly say that Wilson Sonsini wouldprobably have to modify its model to be a player of significance in New York,and it will have to scale it, and the question is will it, should it, and can it? Ithink the jury’s out on all three! [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, time will tell.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You were asked to be chairman when [Richard A.] Grasso “departed”—to putit gracefully. Sonsini: Yes. There was a day when there was a crisis, and I think the idea came fromHank Paulson, who was running Goldman Sachs at the time and becameSecretary of the Treasury. There was a desire to have interim leadership tohelp stabilize the situation, and they asked me to do it and gave me about threeor four hours to decide. And I said no, that this wasn’t in the best interests ofthe Exchange. I would have loved doing it, but I believed that we needed tobring in an independent outsider to restore integrity. I was part of the Grassoadministration; I thought the world of him. I was involved in their governancecommittee with Leon Panetta, a wonderful, wonderful man, now the head ofthe CIA. And I think we all collaborated and said yes, we’d better form acommittee and find someone.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you involved in Grasso’s compensation package that hit the news withnot very nice repercussions? Sonsini: I wasn’t involved on the compensation committee, no.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you said no because you were too closely aligned with the— Sonsini: No. It required a full-time position and a long-term commitment, and I don’tthink I was in a position to serve as effectively as was required.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Would taking the position on the Exchange have required moving to NewYork? Sonsini: I think so, to do it right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [shuffling papers] I can’t find the quote, but it comes from the introduction toyour interview in the Done Deals book. It said something to the effect that Do you buy that? Sonsini: I was part of a small group of us that did it together. I think I helped, withothers, to establish the infrastructure of the technology industry as we see it inSilicon Valley, and helped set the recipe for the culture, relationships, attitudeand diversity, and all those factors I mentioned. I think, yes, I was a part of it,and I think we did some good things.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I thank you. Sonsini: Thank you. You’re very kind. 
Interviewer: It is April 22, 2010, and this is an interview with Sanford—better known asSandy—Robertson. I want to start back with where you were born, a little bitabout your family and your education. Robertson: All right. Well, I was born in Chicago, grew up in the suburbs of Chicago. Myfather [Donald Robertson] was kind of a serial entrepreneur, so geneticallymaybe I get some of this stuff. He had a candy company and then a veryfamous restaurant [Hearthstone House, Winnetka, IL], and then sold that. Hethen had a whole series of little companies. He always said, you will never behappy till you have your own firm. And I said, “Well, Dad, I’ll be aninvestment banker, and I won’t be just an employee. If I make it, I’ll be apartner of that firm.” He said, “Well, we’ll see how that is.” Well, I was apartner of Smith Barney, and I called him, and he was a week or so away fromhis eightieth birthday. I said, “Dad, I’ve always done what you’ve alwayswanted me to do. I’ve started my own firm.” He said, “Oh, that’s good. Istarted a new company this week myself.” [laughter] So I think I come by thisa little bit genetically.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, it sounds that way. Was there a lot of conversation around the dinnertable about what he was doing with his various businesses? Robertson: Yes. I was born fairly late in his life. In the 1920’s, he was quite successful inhis first company, and he helped several other friends found companies. Itwasn’t called venture capital in those days. He did it all on a loan basis topeople.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: He devised that system on his own? Robertson: He just felt strongly that people should, if they could, be working forthemselves and have their own business.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What happened during the Depression? Robertson: In the twenties he had a hand-dipped candy business, like those white storesthat are out there now.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: See’s.  Robertson: Like See’s Candies. He had seventeen stores. When the Depression camealong, that was a very postponable expense. He was able to unwind those,didn’t have to take it into bankruptcy, got out of every lease, and wound thething down, of which he was proud that it didn’t go into[bankruptcy].<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So he was clever as well. Robertson: I think he was pretty clever, yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Are you an only child? Robertson: I am.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You went to high school in the Chicago area? Robertson: I went to a very high-powered high school called New Trier, with abouttwenty-five hundred students at the time. It still continues to be a very toughhigh school and a very great education.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you beginning to get interested in anything in particular? Robertson: My father’s next business was a major restaurant. Duncan Hines, who was theMichelin Guide of the time, had rated it one of the five best restaurants in thecountry. It was large, and so I worked in that and was close to my father’swork. I could see it and worked in it, and so I always thought— I happened tododge a bullet, because he sold it just before I went to college, so I didn’t haveto go to the Cornell Hotel School and come back and run it. But I could seehow hard he worked and what that produced and saw how a business was runat quite an early age. I probably thought I always wanted to be a businessman.I had one grandfather who was a doctor. I considered that for a while. Onegrandfather was a lawyer, and that didn’t appeal to me. But business wasalways in the forefront of my thinking.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did that mean any special emphasis, such as more math? I guess at the highschool level it’s a little hard to figure out what you take for business. Robertson: I took the normal pre-college courses, the college advanced courses, and yes, Itook quite a bit of math, but nothing out of the ordinary. It was pretty well setwith what you had to take in high school. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And then the next step was the University of Michigan? Robertson: The University of Michigan.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why Michigan? Robertson: Well, I went to a very, very large high school, and so I thought the next stepup would be to be at something larger. I toured the eastern schools andparticularly liked Williams and Amherst, which were smaller, but then Ithough, gee, that’s a step down in size. A friend had gone to Michigan acouple of years ahead of me and was really liking it. You could go anydirection there. So that’s not unlike Berkeley. In fact, when I go to Berkeley itreminds me of Ann Arbor.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is it Michigan that has the residential colleges? Robertson: They’ve just started that in recent years.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, I see. So that wasn’t what you experienced, obviously. Robertson: No. You were just thrown in the lake and you had to swim.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What happened in those four years? Robertson: Well, I knew again that I probably wanted to go to business school. One otherfact on Michigan that led me there is you could get an MBA in a total of fiveyears rather than six. By this time the Korean War was on, and it looked prettyattractive to do that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Attractive so you avoided the draft. Robertson: Well, you were going to get drafted when you got out. Something most peopledon’t remember was in the Korean War you took a national exam, and if youscored seventy on it—I don’t know what that number really means—youcould stay in school through your undergraduate degree. If you got seventyfive, you could go to graduate school before being drafted.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I’d never heard that.  Robertson: So I was able to go through graduate school and thought about goingsomewhere else for business school. But it was attractive to save that extrayear, because you had to have at least two years in the army or go in someofficer program.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did that mean that, in your senior year or whenever, you could start to takebusiness courses? Robertson: That’s exactly right, yes. You kind of overlapped it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Looking back at your business school experience, has it helped in what youdid thereafter? Robertson: Yes. Business school was very good. It gives you all the techniques. I don’tthink business school is for everybody. We have people here in the firm thatare doing so well, and they understand business so well that sometimes itwould be a waste of two years for them to go and get an MBA.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Are these people who have run business of their own? Is that how they gettheir experience? Robertson: In one case, yes. One guy ran a business all the way though college and sold itfor quite a bit to another student. So he was a natural athlete in the world ofbusiness.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is that coming to be a more general perception? That an MBA isn’t absolutelyde rigueur? Robertson: Well, I think it’s still important for most people to have, and you really learnthe techniques of creating a business.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was the business school at Michigan known for a certain orientation asopposed to, say, the Sloan School of Management or Harvard or whatever youwant to take as an example? Robertson: At that time it was known for finance and particularly for accounting. It hadthe best accounting department in the country.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did that resonate with you?  Robertson: I did the basic things in accounting, but I didn’t get into the details. I wasmore finance.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And that you liked. Robertson: I loved that, yes, right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: We’re moving fast, I know, over significant time, but is there anything elseyou want to say about those five years at Michigan? Robertson: At a school like that, you’re really on your own. It’s like being out in the realworld. And I always felt that that was an advantage. You really had to makeall the decisions yourself. There was no—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: No advisors. Robertson: Well, technically, I guess, there was an advisor, but he probably had ahundred people he had to talk to. But you really were on your own. And ittaught you to be very independent and make your own decisions.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did that have the possible downside of not having a close relationship withyour professors? Robertson: No, that did happen, that you could have a close relationship with yourprofessor.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was there anybody that you would consider a mentor? Robertson: There were a couple of them. One was a finance professor who really got meinterested in corporate finance, and another was an economics professor, andanother one was the dean emeritus who taught a comparative economicscourse. They were all people you really remember and think back on.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, before we leave Michigan, you mentioned off-tape that you’d had aMichigan group here yesterday. So obviously you maintain the ties. In whatway?  Robertson: Well, this whole room yesterday was filled with the University of Michiganinvestment committee and the investment staff. I’ve been on the investmentcommittee for about fifteen years, and we have a very active, very goodinvestment committee, and about an $8 billion endowment.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And it’s doing all right, considering the downturn? Robertson: It’s doing very well.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, that’s an exception to a lot of stories. Robertson: We had our advisor, Cambridge Associates, here and they rank all theseschools on a code basis. But you can figure out by size who it is. And we havedone extremely well versus Harvard and Yale.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, you read about that. Robertson: Just before this downturn, we ranked second to Harvard one year, second toYale one year, but on a blended basis we ranked first over the two years.We’ve had a good investment manager, which is the key to that. We’ve gotseven other guys on this committee and one woman, who are phenomenal.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do committee members see an approach the same way? Robertson: No, we all come from different backgrounds. There’s a venture capitalist andan M&A [mergers & acquisitions] expert, a pension fund manager, one guyfrom Goldman Sachs, one from Bain [& Company] bringing in more of amanagement consulting view toward things, and it’s a very outspoken group.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It must be fun! Robertson: It is a lot of fun, yes, right. It’s a way to contribute to the university too.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That’s after many years too. That’s quite a contribution on your part. All right,the next step is the navy. So tell me about that. Robertson: Well, the Korean War was on, and when you graduated then you were eligiblefor the draft, which would have been two years in the army. But there was a navy program to become a naval officer that was very popular. You had tostay in for three years—three years after going through Officer CandidateSchool. That program was highly desirable, and there were 450 people in ourclass out of twenty thousand that applied. It was the greatest bunch of guysI’ve ever been around in my life—really, really wonderful guys.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What were the criteria for entry? Was it all about grade point average? Robertson: Well, I guess you took an exam, but everybody there had an MBA, a lawdegree, or a master’s in engineering. So they might have looked at theeducation. With only five years to get an MBA [1954], I was the mostundereducated, because most of the people had six years to get their [MBA]—or seven years for law school. But it was a terrific bunch of guys, and they’veall thrived since then. One’s been partner at Morgan Stanley, one’s a partnerof CS [Credit Suisse] First Boston, another one head of a law firm in Hartford,another one head of a New York law firm. I’m still in touch with a half dozenof them—really, really terrific group of guys.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: To what purpose was the navy going to use this group? Robertson: Well, most of us were becoming supply officers—the MBAs and the lawyers.The master’s in engineering guys went on to specialized engineeringfunctions, and a couple of people went into navy intelligence. But it was aprogram, this OCS [Officer Candidate School], where they normally washedout about 30 percent of the people, and then you spent the rest of the time asan enlisted man if you washed out. They couldn’t flunk anybody out of thisgroup, and they didn’t know what they had. So one week they just canceled allthe classes and gave us psychological tests and intelligence tests all day long,which became a real advantage later on looking for a job. If the company gaveyou an intelligence test or a psychological test, you’d seen the questionsbefore! [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What did you end up doing? Robertson: I went to Japan. I had a very good experience in the navy. First I went toGuam and I was a supply officer. It was a cargo-handling battalion, which inwartime would go in after the amphibious troops. But we had differentpeacetime functions. There were thirteen officers and five hundred men, andthen the Korean War by then had ended. So they cut it back to three officersand a hundred men and sent us to Japan. Well, I became the number twoofficer, the executive officer, in this scenario, which meant that I was theoperating person of the group. I learned more, frankly, about running mybusiness later in life by running that navy operation than I did in business school, because it was really practical, hands-on experience, getting people towork for you, giving an order, working for someone. And when the captain,the number one guy, had to go on emergency leave, I actually had commandof a naval unit for about a month.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How old were you at that point? Robertson: I was twenty-five. So that was a great experience after business school. Ialways thought I was going to waste my time going in the service for a while.However, I got a lot more out of those three years in the navy than I couldhave as a trainee at some big corporation.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So that was still occupied Japan, wasn’t it? Wasn’t [Douglas] MacArthur stillthere? Robertson: No. It was a little after that, because I was there in ’56 and ’57.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. An interesting time nonetheless. Robertson: It was a great time to be there, yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Then you went to American Hospital Supply Corporation for one year [1958]. Robertson: Yes, when I got out of the navy I thought I either wanted to go to a mediumsize growing corporation or get in the investment world. And AmericanHospital Supply, the year I joined them, went from $65 million in sales to$100. It later became a billion dollar company, more than a billion dollarcompany, and it was a very growing, interesting company.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And that’s what attracted you? The growth of it? Robertson: That’s what attracted me, but I also found out that I really missed theinvestment world. It was in Evanston, Illinois, near Northwestern University,and at the end of the day I’d go down to their financial library and look upstocks and think about securities, and I thought I should make my avocationand my vocation coincide. So I quit and joined Smith Barney [1959-1969].<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And of course the obvious question is why Smith Barney?  Robertson: Well, they were the one that offered me a job! [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That’s a good reason. Did that mean Wall Street? Where did you go? Robertson: Well, then I went to New York for a year to work for Smith Barney, through avery extensive, wonderful training program that they had.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was it a general training program? Or were they slotting you towards a certainaspect of the business? Robertson: It was a general training program, and they actually put you to work in eachdepartment. I worked on the then second largest offering, of A&P. How thenumbers have changed. It was an $84 million offering which would hardly getanybody’s attention today. The only one that had been larger had been Ford,which had had a $100 million offering.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And were you getting more and more convinced that the investment side ofthings was where your interest lay? Robertson: Oh, I loved it even as the most junior person around. It was wonderful.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now did that training serve you well later on? Robertson: Very much so, oh yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So a year in the training program, in New York. Did you have a family yet? Robertson: I did. I had a wife and one daughter at the time. I almost stayed in New York,but I had been hired to go back to Chicago, and I decided to go back there.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: With Smith Barney. Robertson: With Smith Barney.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And why? Robertson: They were giving me some responsibilities that I thought were very good. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were they responsibilities above and beyond the time you’d been with thefirm? You’d only been there a year. Robertson: I’d only been there a year, but in the first year it was all in New York in atraining program. But in Chicago they were going to give me theresponsibility of covering Iowa and Nebraska for them, and I could be outthere on my own.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that unusual? Would people emerging from a year’s training programusually have been given something as responsible? Robertson: One would usually be behind somebody else. And I was briefly. But this guysaid he was going to be promoted and I’d have it all to myself.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And of course you loved that. Robertson: You could call on all the insurance companies, and the industrial companiesout there. Also, Warren Buffet and the investment managers.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How was Smith Barney as your umbrella? I should be more direct because Iwas hoping to get a flavor for investment banking on the East Coast, asopposed to what’s going to happen on the West Coast. So I guess my questionshould be, are you getting a feeling for the culture of investment banking? Isthat what you’re doing at Smith Barney? Robertson: Yes. It was the East Coast culture at Smith Barney.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Please expand on that. Robertson: Well, they were looking at traditional companies, both in the East and inChicago. They weren’t looking at growth companies. There weren’t theentrepreneurially financed companies to speak of.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And no high-tech. Robertson: No high-tech. There were some very good companies. The A.C. NielsenCompany was a company we did a lot of work for. And Nielsen then, I think,was the second largest user of computers in the country, using all this data.They were known for their television rating thing. But really what they did was measure how fast soap and shampoo and goods moved off the shelves inthe supermarket. Nielsen had been started by one man. By then it had been inbusiness maybe twenty years, so it wasn’t a new startup sort of thing. Butmost of the companies, at one point, had been entrepreneurially financed.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And at this point you didn’t know of any other way of doing it, did you? Robertson: No, that’s right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you were not questioning why Smith Barney was sticking with relativelyconservative, established companies. Are those adjectives right? Robertson: That’s absolutely correct. Then when I got to the West Coast, I couldn’t trainthem otherwise. That was one of the reasons I spun off and did my own firm.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, are we there? No—I have 1959 to 1969 at Smith Barney, so that’s tenyears—that’s longer than you’ve been anywhere else. Robertson: By 1965 I had become the assistant manager of the Chicago office, andovernight they’d fired the head of the San Francisco office. I got called in andthey said, did I want to go out to San Francisco. I think they’d thought of mebecause the firm had no office in Los Angeles at the time, and Los Angeleshad just passed Chicago as the second largest city. So I was kind ofnegotiating with the firm to open up in Los Angeles for them, and they musthave thought of me in relation to California.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And then you would run that office? Robertson: And I would run that office—yes. But that was still being thought about. Theyfired the San Francisco manager, and I went out and on four hours’ notice gotin a plane and came to the West Coast. So then on the West Coast—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But this is still—? Robertson: I was with Smith Barney, so I was running Smith Barney’s office.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: In San Francisco.  Robertson: In San Francisco, but it had responsibilities for all of the West Coast andHawaii.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that intimidating? Robertson: No. [chuckling] It was fun! There was a lot to be done. There was a lot to bedone.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And did you have a good staff in place? Robertson: Yes and no. I recruited Ken [Kenneth F.] Siebel and Bob [Robert] Colmanfrom other parts of the firm. I’d hired Siebel for Chicago, and he was in NewYork being trained when I came out, and he was the key guy that I reallybrought out. No—the office had to be beefed up a lot. So I recruited severalpeople.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, does that reflect Smith Barney philosophy somewhat? That theemphasis is still on the East Coast, and okay, they’ve got the San Franciscooffice, but they’re not going to put their best people there? Robertson: Well, the fact that they fired my predecessor probably means that they didn’thave the right guy, but it needed to be changed quite a bit.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But the impression I’m getting, and perhaps it’s wrong, is that this was not acenter of real focus for Smith Barney. They were still East Coast-focused? Robertson: Right, and they’d never, ever done a piece of investment banking on the WestCoast. It was strictly a brokerage operation. So in one of the fastest growing,most interesting parts of the country they had a big goose egg.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So Silicon Valley went right over their head? Robertson: They didn’t even know the name. And the name probably wasn’t being evenused then.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, I think the name comes sometime in the seventies. But there was plentygoing on there, name or no name.  Robertson: Well, first they said, “Go call on the Bank of America, call on Chevron, callthe forest products companies, utilities.” I said, “No, the really interestingcompanies out here are Hewlett-Packard and Varian Associates and Ampexand Fairchild Semiconductor.” They said, “Semiconductors—that’s bad stuff.They’ll have a good semiconductor one year, and the next year someone elsehas a better one, and maybe Texas Instruments is better. Don’t worry aboutthose companies.” And I said, “Well, I really think we ought to.” So I wentahead and called on these companies anyway.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now why did you have that mindset? Robertson: Well, I think it’s genetic. My father being a serial entrepreneur, I was reallyinterested in small business and growing businesses. Even the year atAmerican Hospital Supply; it was a very interesting company.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: In what way? Robertson: The year I spent there it was a nice, fast-growing company, almost 50%.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see, but that was a big company. You’re saying because it was really intogrowth that you were catching that idea? Robertson: Growth, a growing company, yes. But one of the first things I did was do aprivate placement for a company called Spectra-Physics, which was theleading laser company in the world, and a very, very fine company. They justdominated— They had 70 percent of the world’s laser market, and it’s how Imet Tom Perkins too. But Spectra-Physics was just the leader in its wholefield, and I got the firm to do a private placement. We placed some privatestock with venture firms.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: When you say a private placement, does that mean Smith Barney funds? Orwere you raising— Robertson: Well, both. It was basically raising it to put in some venture capitalists’ handsin the East. But I got the firm to take a $100,000 piece themselves. I said,“You really ought to do this.” Well, this was a little bit far out for the firm.And when I’d go back for a partners meeting, my partners would say, “Hey,Buck Rogers, how’s our ray gun company going out there?” And I couldn’tteach them that this was a valid thing—that lasers were starting to be used asscanners in supermarkets where you passed the barcode over it; they wereused in technical instruments like interferometers. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But Smith Barney didn’t buy that? They just thought it was a flash in the pan? Robertson: Well, they didn’t really realize, in a way, what they had. Then they turned medown on a financing for Fairchild Semiconductor.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: For the same reason? Robertson: The same reason.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why do we want those semiconductors? Robertson: Yes, and so at that point I thought I’ve got to start my own firm. So KenSiebel was the one who I’d really recruited, and Bob Colman. And we broughtthem in, and the three of us decided to start our own firm [Robertson, Colman,Siebel, Weisel].<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, before we move on past the lasers, I do want you to tell me about theTom Perkins connection. By then he had University Labs, right? Robertson: Well, he had University Labs, and we merged that into Spectra-Physics.Spectra Physics had been making lasers strictly for scientific use—interferometers—and they were doing some barcode scanning, the very earlydays of that. But Tom had started University Labs that originally made a kitfor kids to use in school.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: He didn’t tell me that. I didn’t realize it was for kids. Robertson: Well, that was the original project, and it led to lasers being used inconstruction. What they did was take the laser, and they used it to make a linearound a wall. It would be on a tripod and going around, and then you couldput your ceiling tiles in and get them absolutely straight. If you were digging aditch, a sewer, it had to be maybe dropped three inches every hundred yards toget the flow of the water. Well, that was very difficult to do with a string andtripods and surveying instruments. You could do that with a laser line goingdown that trench. So they were doing things like that with lasers. The thirdthing they did was if you were grading a piece of land and you wanted itabsolutely smooth, you could use the laser, which is a straight point of light,where a string might have sagginess to it or something. They took lasers andused them in very prosaic but very useful ways. So that’s what UniversityLabs did, and we put that into Spectra-Physics. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But Spectra-Physics already had a laser of its own? Robertson: Spectra-Physics was manufacturing them.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, I see how it went. And University Labs, as the name implies, was inBerkeley. But where is/was Spectra-Physics? Robertson: It was in Mountain View.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All right. So there we get Silicon Valley, don’t we. Robertson: Yes, and Charles Townes, who had gotten the Nobel Prize for the laser, wason an advisory board for them.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: We have a huge oral history with him, by the way. Robertson: Do you really?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It’s online. Robertson: Oh, well—good! I met him one time. He’s a very, very nice guy. Robertson: Anyway, that’s how I met Tom—through that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I know from talking to him fairly recently that he made money whenUniversity Labs was sold, of course. He didn’t immediately leave HewlettPackard, but I think the fact that he had money to play with was instrumentalin the idea that he wanted to go into venture capital. Robertson: Yes, it gave him his stake away from Hewlett-Packard, and he was veryimportant to Hewlett-Packard. He was running the computer division. But hehad an entrepreneurial bent, and he was investing in some things other thanjust University Labs, and Hewlett-Packard was very approving of this. Theythought it gave their people more entrepreneurial spirit, and they liked that. Alot of companies wouldn’t let someone do that, but Hewlett-Packardapparently did. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, tell the story, please, about your introduction of Tom Perkins and GeneKleiner. Robertson: Well, when we started our firm, we decided we wanted some limited partners.Number one, for capital, but number two, to help us find business. We hadsome capital partners; we had some General Mills founders who put $100,000in, and a real estate guy, and then Tom Perkins. We thought he was in touchwith the growing companies that we might want to know. It was part of ourRolodex to have a farm system and have people like Tom point us towardcompanies. Eugene Kleiner was another one.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How had you known him? Robertson: Eugene—I don’t think I knew Gene that well. Ken Siebel and I went andcalled on him cold and told him what we were going to do. As a matter offact, we had not met him until we had that meeting.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was he still at Fairchild? Robertson: No, he’d left Fairchild. And he’d done another company that was doingeducational terminals. You could do some interactive learning through theterminals, and he sold that to Raytheon. He had started another company thathad been successful and sold it. But he was a Fairchild founder. He had acouple other companies, but the one that he was known for secondarily, afterFairchild, was this educational company. Ken Siebel and I called on him coldand talked to him, and he committed $100,000 on the spot. He liked what wewere going to do.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was it the high-tech emphasis that caught him? Robertson: Yes, exactly. And we said that we wanted to underwrite high-tech companies.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: When was this? Robertson: That would have been in ’69.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you call it, in investment banking, a fund? Robertson: No, it was not a fund. It was an investment banking firm. So anyway, we had about eight limited partners. Kleiner was one, Perkins wasthe other. They didn’t know each other. I’d had lunch with Tom one day, andhe said, “You know, at some point I want to leave Hewlett-Packard and do aventure fund.” Then I also had lunch with Eugene one day, and he said, “TheHillman family wants to give me a couple of million dollars to do a venturefund.” This is 1972. Brentwood Associates in Los Angeles had been trying fortwo years to raise a $5 million fund, and it had taken them two years. Ihappened to run into them, and they said, “Oh,! We’ve finally got our fundtogether after working on this for two years.” And so I knew there’s probablysome money around. So I said to both Tom and Eugene, “I think maybethere’s a little bit of money around for some venture capital now,” and Iwanted to introduce them to each other. So we met at Rickey’s Hyatt House, which was the place you met forbreakfast in those days. I guess it’s now Buck’s. But in those days it wasRickey’s Hyatt House, and we met at 8:00. The chemistry was wonderful rightfrom the beginning. We finally got kicked out of there about quarter of twelvewhen they wanted to set up the place for lunch. Eugene had the semiconductorworld covered, and Tom had the computer world covered. And theyoverlapped a little bit with their friends and Rolodex. They hadn’t known eachother before, but they really hit it off.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But very different personalities. Robertson: Extremely different personalities.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I unfortunately never had a chance to talk to Gene Kleiner, but just from whatI’ve read— Robertson: Eugene was just a wonderful individual, very quiet, very thoughtful, and areally fine, fine person, just a wonderful human being.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And so he and Tom clicked on a personal level too? Robertson: It was on a personal level too. That was a Thursday morning, and they said,“Well, we’ll get together over the weekend and talk.” And they talked most ofSaturday and most of Sunday and called me on Monday morning and said,“Let’s go raise a fund!” We were going to try for a $10 million fund, and Iguess we must have started raising the money right after Labor Day. By thefirst week in December, we had $8.4 million raised. And it was so tenuous;we thought over Christmas someone might change his mind. Maybe we’dbetter close this thing out at $8.4 million. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that the economy? I know the early seventies weren’t a great period ingeneral for risky investment. But was that also because people didn’t knowwhat venture capital was? Robertson: Partly. It seemed very risky to people, extremely risky to people. Theeconomy in ’72 had gotten a little bit better. It wasn’t horrible. We’d taken athrough ’72—so till early ’72 we hadn’t done any offerings. There was an IPOmarket a little bit, but it was thought to be very risky, and there was nothingreally developed in this area. And a $5 million fund was a big fund, it was areally huge fund. So we thought we were going to try for 10, and we had 8.4.We thought, boy, over Christmas we might lose a couple of these guys, solet’s close it out. In reality, Kleiner Perkins never spent the full 8.4.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why? Because you couldn’t find good enough deals? Robertson: They couldn’t find enough deals, and then they were about to do Fund II.Then people wanted to put more money into it, and so they did Fund II.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that pretty quickly after that? Robertson: That one was called Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers, rather than Kleiner &Perkins.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So that’s maybe about ’74-’75-ish? Robertson: It was probably ’74-’75, maybe ’74. So out of the $8 million, they probablyput only five or six to work. They were thinking about buying some publicstocks, but the limited partners didn’t give them money to put in public stocks.The limiteds could do that themselves.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Would that be legal to do that? Robertson: Yes, it would. Robertson: But when people put money in venture capital, they want you to put it inventure capital. They don’t want you to buy Intel when it’s cheap, orsomething like that. They can go do that themselves. You can tell them youthink it looks cheap, but they really want the risk/reward ratio of venturecapital. Both Tandem and Genentech came out of that fund. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It was all right, wasn’t it. Robertson: And a couple of others that were probably doubles or something like that,nothing like the multiples on Tandem and Genentech.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now did your firm ride on this success? Robertson: Well, we were the placement agent for them. So we raised the money and thenwe were close to them. When they had a company ready to go public, wehoped that we would have a chance to take it public.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But that wasn’t a hard and fast understanding? Robertson: No, it was just sort of friends, right. And we did take almost all of thempublic. I can’t think of one of the Kleiner & Perkins companies in the earlydays we didn’t take public.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But you were a new company. You’d only been founded since 1969. As yousaid, you had Tandem and Genentech in that first fund. Robertson: Yes, they had it in their first fund.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Maybe it wasn’t obvious yet what a success that fund was going to be. I’mwondering about the interaction between the Kleiner Perkins fund and yourcompany trying to get off the ground. Robertson: Well, we were off the ground by the time we raised the money for them. Weweren’t huge, but we were part of the “four horsemen” at the time who weredoing deals.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And who are the four horsemen? Robertson: Well, it basically was Hambrecht & Quist and ourselves, and [L.F.]Rothschild, Unterberg, Towbin, and then Alex Brown [& Sons].<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Are they all on the West Coast? 20 Robertson: Alex Brown was in Baltimore. Then Montgomery [Securities], which our firmbegan—and we spun out—that’s a whole other story, kind of became theother four horsemen and Unterberg, Towbin went away. But there werealways four of us doing these deals.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I’m also interested in what happened when Thom Weisel arrived—fourpartners. How were you four working together? Robertson: Well, what happened—the firm was originally Robertson, Colman & Siebel.And in ’72, we added Weisel. He had been with another firm. And then a yearlater we put his name on the door. It was Robertson, Colman, Siebel & Weiselabout ’73. Ken Siebel retired to become a money manager, which was hisor ’77. And then in 1978, the firm split in two.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And that was unhappy, wasn’t it? Robertson: That was unhappy. The other firm had the New York Stock Exchange seat, soeffectively Robertson, Colman, Siebel & Weisel became MontgomerySecurities. We bought a new seat and started Robertson, Colman, Stephens,later called Robertson Stephens.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And what was the unhappiness? Robertson: Well, Weisel was very difficult to get along with, so we could have goneinternally and had a big fight, and the firm probably would have split apartanyway. So we just quietly resigned at the end of the fiscal year and went ourseparate ways and took the name. We took the name; they took the NYSEseat.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I’ve never heard what it means to buy a seat. Robertson: There’s a market in seats. There was always a bid and ask. And we boughtthat seat very cheaply at about $75,000.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What would it be nowadays? Robertson: Now it’s publicly held, so it is not comparable. We bought the seat for$75,000. It had been over $500,000 in the late sixties, and then it crasheddown to about $75,000. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you were fortunate. Robertson: We did it with perfect timing. It’s no trouble buying one, but you do have totake some exams, and you have to show that you’re competent, and you’vegot to get approved by the committee. But that’s not difficult to do. If youhaven’t had experience in the business, they might want to put you throughsome training, particularly if you’re going to work on the floor and actuallytrade with specialists. You’ve got to know some technical procedures.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But nobody in your firm intended to do that, did they? Robertson: No. We would have someone else do it for us.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So is this now Robertson Stephens that we’re talking about? Robertson: Now we’re talking about Robertson Stephens.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: 1978 to September 1998 is what I got from your bio. Robertson: That’s right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What to say about Robertson Stephens! There’s so much! [laughter] Well,first of all, who’s Stephens? Robertson: Paul Stephens. He’s a money manager in town. Stephens InvestmentManagement, and he had been with us at Robertson, Colman. He’s a guy Ihired out of Berkeley, as a matter of fact.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So was that a natural for the two of you to be partners? Robertson: Yes. He had worked with Ken Siebel, and when Ken left he kind of took overthat function in the firm. They were close friends, and Siebel’s still a veryclose friend. I’m about to go to his daughter’s wedding in a couple of weeks.But Paul kind of took over that brokerage and money management functionfor us, and that’s what Ken Siebel had been doing.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were there other people that you transferred from the old firm? Or did youhave to start from scratch?  Robertson: No, it was two-thirds/one-third. We kept the people that we wanted.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see, so there wasn’t a huge lag period between the old firm and starting upthe new? Robertson: No, there was about a month in there because wehad to get re-registered withthe SEC and all that sort of thing.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And how did you divide up your clients? Robertson: We were competing for them. Montgomery and Robertson Stephens wereboth after them! [chuckling] We actually had most of the banking clients. Ithink we had all of the banking clients.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now why was that? Robertson: Because investment banking was my function.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All right, so it was a vote for Sandy Robertson. Robertson: And Weisel was on the trading desk. He covered the institutional clients, andthe institutions deal with everybody. So we took the banking clients, but theystill had the institutional relationships, and so did we.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You took them, but isn’t it more accurate to say they chose to go with you? Robertson: The ones that came with us, yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You couldn’t just say, “You’re coming with us, boys.” [chuckling] Robertson: No, that’s right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I don’t know this area, so I’m asking some naïve questions. Robertson: Everybody we asked to come over came, except one. And he had a prettygood situationwhere he was. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, that’s a pretty good vote of confidence, isn’t it? Robertson: That’s right, yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So this is 1978. Things are getting better in the economy, aren’t they? Robertson: [pause] Yes—that was an okay year. It’s relative to what we’ve seen—thenumbers have changed so dramatically. We’ve not added one zero, but twozeroes in some of these things.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I know that was the year that Congress reduced the capital gains tax. Robertson: That’s right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And that must have made a difference to you. Robertson: Yes, I was very involved in that as a matter of fact.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, were you? Well, tell me that story. Robertson: Ed[win] Zschau, who later ran for the senate here and had been a professor atStanford Business School, headed the American Electronics Associationcommittee on getting the capital gains tax reduced. And that’s right—it wasduring 1978 that that all happened. I was a member of a team that went andtestified before Congress on the bill. Ed was there, and David Morgenthaler,Sr., who was from Cleveland, but he was head of the National Venture CapitalAssociation. And then Bob [Robert N.] Noyce of Intel.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, really! Bob Noyce! Robertson: Who was phenomenal. He had this booming, deep voice.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: There’s a phenomenal biography of him. Robertson: I’ve read a couple of them. He was a wild man! [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: He died too young.  Robertson: I just saw Ann last weekend at a party.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you know Reid Dennis? Robertson: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because he was also a part of that campaign. Robertson: Yes. He wasn’t a part of that particular thing that we did, but he was part of it,yes. I saw him at the same party last week. He was there.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All right. Back to a really basic question. I see a lot of overlap between whatyou are doing and what venture capitalists are doing. So could you clarify thedistinction? Robertson: Well, the venture capitalists create the companies, and when they needliquidity, they like to take them public or merge them out, and that’s where theinvestment banking function comes in. So we could go call on Kleiner Perkinsor another venture capitalist, and talk to them about their portfolio. They’dsay, “Well, we’ve got these three companies that are really growing along,and, rather than do one more private finance, we think they might be ready fora public market.” So then we’d go call on those companies for them and takethem public and get the venture capitalists liquid. And if the company maybewasn’t doing quite so well or needed a lot of money and needed a bigcorporate partner, then we would be brought in to try to merge it withsomebody else.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see, and all this is in the context of what’s going on in the wider economy,right? You’re not going to take a company public in a down market, right? Robertson: That’s correct, yes. For instance in the last couple of years now, it’s been avery quiet IPO market, but that’s changing all of a sudden.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So what does that do to your business? Robertson: Well, you have to make it from things other than the IPO market.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All right, so talk about those other things.  Robertson: The other thing you would do is you have a research department where theyknow these technologies in depth. You give those ideas to the institutionalinvestor, and they gave you brokerage business in return. It was a very steadybusiness. Most of these stocks were over the counter, so you made markets inthose stocks, and maybe you took an eighth between the bid and the ask andmade money that way.[End Audio File 1] Robertson: The venture capitalists create the companies, and then when they’re ready toget liquid on a company and take it public or merge it out, this is when theinvestment banker comes in. So we can go to a venture capitalist and say,“What are your best companies? Which ones do you want to get liquid onnow?” Then we would go and work directly with those companies abouttaking them public and getting them liquid so the venture capitalists could sellsome stock and get liquid. And then if the company isn’t quite ready to gopublic, maybe they need to be merged out. So you do a merger or acquisition.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, when you say a company is not quite ready to go public, what kind ofthings are you thinking about? Robertson: It’s either their top line or their bottom line isn’t large enough.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It’s really as simple as that? Robertson: Yes. It’s basically as simple as that. And that may be because they don’t havetheir product quite developed, or they’re waiting for a second generation tocome along which would be better suited for a larger market. But basically it’seither that top line or the bottom line isn’t enough yet.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, before we get too much further, I would like you to tell that lovely storyabout your wife’s definition of investment banking. Robertson: When I was dating my wife, she didn’t quite know what an investment bankerwas and didn’t know how that related to being a commercial banker. We hadtwo uninterrupted hours driving to Monterey for an American ElectronicsAssociation conference, so she said, “Let’s take this time—you tell me aboutthe business.” So I told her, talked for two hours about investment bankingand what we did. She says, “Okay. Now I’ve got it.” And she’s never askedme another question again. But at the end of that she said, “Well, it’s pretty easy what you do. You take money out of one pile, and you smoosh it around,and you put it in another pile.” And I said, “Well, that’s probably true, that’sall we do, but it’s very competitive.” [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That’s very nice. I do want to talk about biotech, and you just mentionedproducts as one of the aspects of your consideration of what to do with acompany. Biotech when you began associations with companies likeHybritech and Chiron and others, there were no products. So did you have toreadjust your criteria for how to deal with these new companies? Robertson: That’s right. In the biotech world, you saw what phase trials they were in andwhat the prospects were. Right now in 2010, it’s pretty difficult to finance abiotech company because it takes so long to get through the FDA, and there’snot a lot of money around to keep financing these things. So these companiesare hoarding their cash. In the very early days, people were betting—in a Genentech, for instance—that they could raise enough money to get through all these trials and get theirproducts to market. And it’s a fairly speculative bet.You were talking about Tom Perkins before. My first ever conversation aboutbiotechnology was with Tom, and we were having lunch at the Pacific UnionClub, where you’re not supposed to talk business or bring papers out on thetable. And Tom wanted to explain to me how Genentech worked, so he pullsout a piece of paper, and he draws a circle and he says: you take this slice outof an E. coli bacteria and you put this other thing in there. And they came overand said, “Oh, Mr. Perkins. I’m sorry, but you can’t have papers on the table.”We’ve always laughed that that might have set biotech back five years![laughter] But it was a totally new area for people, and there was a lot ofeducation to be done.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What was your attitude towards biotech? Robertson: It was extremely exciting stuff. Very, very exciting things, yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Tell me a little bit more why. It was new. Robertson: It was new. I’d always had an interest in the healthcare world, partly becauseof working for American Hospital Supply for a year, which gave me a crosssection view of the industry. In later years, I realized that it wasn’t a wastedyear because I got such a background in the healthcare world. But this was awhole new area. It had great promise. It could do things that chemistrycouldn’t do, and it was very, very exciting. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And you had Tom Perkins beating the drum. Robertson: We had Tom, and Brook Byers had started Hybritech, and we took that public.And then we sold that to Eli Lilly. We did more deals for Chiron than anyother client. We did ten or eleven transactions for Chiron to keep themfinanced and viable.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Of what nature? Robertson: First would be the IPO. Then maybe a secondary for them, really a secondprimary offering. We did convertible debt for them; we did mergers for them;we advised, along with others, on their final sale to the Swiss [Novartis], etcetera. So a company like that always needed money, and so they were verygood banking clients. They also were very subject to being merged, becauseyou could take two bio companies with two different product lines and putone layer of management over them rather than two layers of management—one in each company—and it would be more efficient.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It doesn’t sound to me as though you were much stymied by the fact that therewere no products in these companies at first—no certainty that there would beany near term. Why didn’t that bother you? Or did it bother you? Robertson: Well, you had to assess the risk. We had a very good biotech analyst by thename of Mark [J.] Simon, who then became a biotech investment banker forus. He was extremely good. He had worked in Wall Street as a number two toa very famous biotech analyst. Then we discovered that he was at HarvardBusiness School, and we made him a job offer and put him on the payroll sixmonths before he graduated just so he wouldn’t get hired away by someoneelse. And he turned out to be a great, great analyst.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did he have a biomedical background? Robertson: I think he had an undergraduate science degree, and his father and brotherwere both doctors, and he had a sense of it. He’s been extremely successful.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Knowing the technology, I’m assuming because you haven’t mentioned it allalong, doesn’t seem to be critical to your deciding to associate or not with acompany. A clearer way of saying that—the fact that you don’t have a heavytechnological background doesn’t stop you from deciding on investing?  Robertson: You mean personally?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, and your company as well. Is knowing the technology an importantaspect of the investment decision? Robertson: It is. I consider myself a generalist because I do semiconductors and softwareand biotech. But we had a stable of security analysts eventually that were veryvertically oriented, very much looked at different companies indepth. Thebiotech analyst though, as opposed to a semiconductor analyst, said, “Gee,every time you bring us a new company to look at, I’m looking at a differentindustry.” And he was somewhat correct, because the biotech companiesdiffer so much versus a chip company where you know what market they’regoing to go into, and you know how they’re doing the chip. A chip analyst canbe much more vertical, but the biotech analyst had to be vertical andhorizontal in looking at different things. So we ended up having three biotechanalysts at one point. So the investment banking side would rely on our ownin-house analysis—or we’d have to go outside. We had consultants who wereat NIH or in major pharmaceutical companies who we could rely on, and wehad a network of doctors and researchers. Apropos the science degree, as we speak today, I have a grandson in NewYork who has a science degree, just graduated from Dartmouth in December.He’s interviewing to work in investment banking in the biotech area or to joina biotech company, not as a scientist, although he’s worked in a lab and beenpaid in a lab, because he wants to go into the business side of biotech. He gothis first offer yesterday. [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Good. Another sign that the economy is getting better too. Robertson: A little bit better.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: People with those bridge backgrounds, at least in the previous economy, usedto be really hot tickets. Robertson: That’s right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I’ve often wondered whether the people that were first interested, invested in,doing commercial biotech, if they really realized how hard the road was goingto be. FDA drug approval is one big hurdle, but there are other things too. Thescience doesn’t always work.  Robertson: Getting the science right. Yes, exactly.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What is your feeling about how gung-ho people were, maybe overly gung-hoabout where this new sector could go? Robertson: There’s a lot of bodies around. A lot of companies didn’t make it or gotmerged out. Maybe they had three products, and maybe one was half decent,so it got merged out. But a huge number did not make it. I’m a director of onebiotech company at the moment, and we’ve been in business ten years andexpect to get final approval sometime this year. But it’s been a ten-yearprocess.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You’ve obviously been willing to stick with it. Robertson: That’s right, and they’ve done their financing beautifully. They have acorporate partner now, so they have almost $200 million on their balancesheet, and the corporate partner is taking all the science risk from here on.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you think that because it is a long-term investment in almost every case,you and others think harder about associating with a biotech company? Robertson: As an investment banker you looked long and hard on this. Yes, very muchso, very much so.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And probably your old-time peers at Smith Barney would say you were crazy![laughter] Robertson: That’s right, exactly! Well, about ten years after we started, the old-time peerscalled on us and said, “Gee, let’s do some deals together. Bring us some of thedeals.” I said, “We don’t have to bring them to you anymore. We can do themourselves.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I mentioned off-tape that Bill [William J.] Rutter had responded to a questionfrom me about you, and I thought you might like to hear what he wrote back.“Sandy is one of the REAL important players in Biotechnology at theInvestment Banker level. You can ask him how much trepidation he had when 30representing rookies like Chiron, etc. [Robertson laughs] with minimal Robertson: Well, that’s right. They didn’t have a lot of venture backing. But Bill and Ed[Edward E.] Penhoet were a great team, and you have to make a judgmentsometimes on the people as much as on the product line. We had our analystlooking at what they were doing, and it was coming out favorably. We likedit, and then you talk to Ed and Bill. Bill had a fine reputation from UCSF, andEd had a great reputation at Berkeley, so we were betting on people as muchas anything.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You didn’t become associated with Chiron until they were ready for the IPO,which was 1983. Robertson: That’s right, that’s right. They were ready to go public, or they thought theywere ready to go public, and that’s when we met them. We didn’t know thembefore that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I believe you just barely got under the wire there with Chiron’s IPO. Themarket closed down very soon after.was okay, and then it shut down.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So people do count. That’s interesting. Robertson: Oh, people absolutely do count, yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Would you go so far as to say that even if the financials and everything elseare right that if you have doubts about the people you might not do the deal? Robertson: We did one deal— I’m trying to think of how specific to be. We did one deal,and we took the company public. We turned down doing the secondarybecause our analyst was starting to have some reservations about thepresident. And years later, I think we were right. That president went to jail.The company’s been okay, but our analyst sensed the character right, and weturned down doing the next round. Rutter to <|endoftext|>
Interviewer, email correspondence, April 21, 2010. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I don’t know what proportion of successes you have had to failures. Would itbe instructive to also talk about a failure? Robertson: Sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is this a time to look at the list [of companies with which Mr. Robertson hasbeen associated]. Robertson: These are all successes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, please think of a failure and why that might have been. Robertson: Well, we also did some retailing deals. I remember Nolan [K.] Bushnell whodid the first Pong game at Atari and did a company called Pizza Time Theater.There are still some of them around, where they had characters that came outand laughed—it was a pizza place. And we were thinking about taking thempublic, and I took my wife over to have dinner at one restaurant. The pizzawas very expensive. The kids would put quarters in the games, and it wouldcost you a lot of money to get in and out when the kids played all these gamesfor a quarter apiece. My wife said, “This is terrible. Don’t do this deal.” Well,we did it. It was very successful at the beginning, extremely successful. Theinstitutions loved it and everything, but it wasn’t well run. Nolan was a greatinnovator, but he wasn’t a restaurant chain manager. And so that did go under,and my wife said, “See? You need me on your commitment committee for thissort of thing.” [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you listen to her from then on? Robertson: [chuckling] In the technology world, the companies didn’t go bankrupt asmuch as get merged out, and maybe got merged out at a fraction of whatthey’d gone public for, or a fraction of what the venture capitalist had in them.But I’m trying to think of a bankruptcy that we did. It’s not deliberate, but Ican’t think of one, because they really would kind of fade away or thetechnology would be sold to somebody.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: In the investment banker world, is it usually a preference that a company stagean IPO rather than merge with an existing company? Is there a preference oneway or the other?  Robertson: Well, I always call it Eugene Kleiner’s Law. Kleiner’s Law was if you’re aventure capitalist and you’re about to invest in a company, he would say,“Don’t invest in it if you think you’re just going to merge it out. Only investin it if you think you can take it all the way to being a public offering.” Andthat’s very good advice, because usually if you’re selling it, there’s a limitednumber of other strategic buyers to sell it to, so you don’t get an auction goingon. If you take it public, you get the world looking at it, ready to buy theirsecurity. In the old days, if you had a company that you couldn’t take publicand you merged it out, the entrepreneur would kind of think of that as being afailure. Not so much anymore because you can sell it to Cisco or Google for abillion dollars, and you’re in pretty good shape.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do the financial rewards tend to be greater with an initial public offering? Robertson: They do. But back in ’99-2000, Kleiner Perkins was very smart. They hadsome companies that were somewhat competing with Cisco, and they wereabout to take them public at billion-dollar valuations. And if they did, theythen could have only sold a little bit of stock on the offering, and they wouldhave had to ease it out over some period of time. They sold two or threecompanies to Cisco at huge valuations, almost the valuations that they mighthave gotten in the public market—maybe not quite, but good valuations. Thenthey took Cisco stock, which was totally liquid—they probably couldn’t sell itfor three or six months—but it was much more liquid security than XYZCorp., where they would have owned 80 percent of it still, and they couldn’thave sold it on the market. They would have had to do that over five years.But Cisco was so large they could sell that stock almost immediately.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So Kleiner Perkins jumped on that in a way that other venture funds didn’t? Robertson: Actually just one of their partners. That was his strategy, and he did it verysuccessfully.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is that John Doerr? Robertson: No. [chuckling] No, it wasn’t John. It was Vinod Khosla.John held on. Johnwas involved with Amazon and with Google, and he just kept those, keptthose going.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Going back to the relationship between investment banking and venturecapital, do you ever find yourself, as an investment banker, at odds with whatthe venture capital partnership wants to do? How symbiotic is thatrelationship?  Robertson: Well, our job is to be honest with them, and so sometimes they’d want to takea company public, and we’d say, “It’s not ready.” And maybe they’d go toanother firm, maybe another firm wouldn’t do it, or maybe they’d want to dosomething we’d disagree with. It was a symbiotic relationship, but it wasn’talways 100 percent in phase.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Does a venture capitalist think of Robertson Stephens or what you are now,Francisco Partners, as being conservative or non-conservative in terms ofdeciding when a company is ready? What is your general reputation? Robertson: In the middle of that. At Robertson Stephens, we acted as an intermediary to amarketplace. We would try to figure out in advance what the company wouldbe worth to the institutional investors and try to pick that price. Sometimes ourcompetitors would say, “Oh, you’re worth 2x ,” what we’d say. And theventure capitalist would say, “Oh, he loves me more. We’d better go withhim.” We always tried to be very conservative in telling what we thoughtcompanies were worth. Then if we could sell it for a higher price, we would.But it was a testing of the market, and that’s where our function came in, tosay, “This company is going to be worth $150 million in the public market;therefore, it’s going to be $10 a share. We think that if we bring it at $10 ashare, it will open at $12, and then would grow from there.” That would havebeen the perfect way to do it. So we had to be honest with them and a little biton the conservative side.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Of course now you have years and years of reputation behind you. Anentrepreneur would know Robertson Stephens, that’s why he came to you, andnow presumably that extends to Francisco Partners. The entrepreneur mightsay to himself, “Well, these people have been in this field for so long, who amI to question their judgment?” Robertson: Yes, but Francisco, a private equity firm, is on the other side of the equationnow. What we’re doing is buying divisions of other companies or, as I like tosay, our Statue of Liberty companies: “Give me your tired and your poor.”We’re looking at companies that are doing poorly in the marketplace and canbe revived, or divisions that larger companies no longer want. We’re lookingat one now that we took public years ago, and it’s kind of a living dead. Wethink we can buy it, fix it up, and make a viable company of it again. So that’swhat Francisco does. So now if the investment banker is coming to us andsaying, “Oh, you’ve got this interesting company.” I say, “It’s now doing verywell. Shouldn’t we take it public again?” We have an offering going today, asa matter of fact.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Does that use basically the same skill sets that you’ve been using all along?  Robertson: Yes, we’re looking at it from the other side of the equation, but it’s the sameset.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why did you decide to do that? Robertson: Well, we sold Robertson Stephens. The other Four Horsemen got sold as well.And they all got ruined by the banks that bought them.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why did they sell in the first place? Robertson: Because the big guys were coming after us. The Morgan Stanleys and theGoldmans were coming after us.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That was because you had expertise that they needed? Robertson: No, they weren’t coming after us to buy us; they were coming after us tocompete, to take a Tandem or a Genentech public.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, I see, because they were moving into this field, seeing what you had done. Robertson: So they wanted to do that, and they were successful at it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because they were so big. Robertson: Because they were so big, particularly Morgan and Goldman. And then CSFirst Boston later. But they were big. So then the other banks, the commercialbanks who didn’t have investment banking, came. Chase bought Hambrecht;Bank of America bought us; NationsBank bought Montgomery; Bankers Trustbought Alex Brown. But they were absorbed into their commercial banking,and the entrepreneurial spirit, or the spirit of these companies, all disappeared.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Nobody anticipated that? Robertson: They really didn’t. It was also a way to capitalize an earnings stream. Wecould have gone public or sold out. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: People have been wondering about Genentech and Roche: will thatentrepreneurial, risky, moving-on-a-dime kind of culture be killed by the bigcompany? Robertson: Yes. I think Roche should not have bought it, because when it still wasGenentech stock trading, they could give Genentech options for people. Sothose people could participate in the growth and the success of Genentechalone, without being a whole part of Roche. So I think there are reasons for itto be done, so I think it changes the character of Genentech.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, well, that’s going to be unfortunate. And for Roche too, because from mylimited understanding, a lot of Roche’s successful drugs came fromGenentech—I mean Genentech before the total acquisition. Robertson: Exactly. And they lost Susan Desmond-Hellmann, who was one of their copresidents and now chancellor at UCSF. Maybe she might not have been asattracted to that job if they were still partly independent.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, and Art Levinson is no longer CEO. Robertson: I didn’t know that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: He’s chairman of the board but not CEO. Robertson: He’s on the Roche board, I know. I talked to him not long ago.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It’s a Roche person, whose name I can’t remember [Ian Clark], who was madeCEO. So time will tell. [chuckling] Robertson: Yes, well, that will take care of itself. I know Art’s on the Roche board, andhe’s enjoying that portion of it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was it a big disappointment/disaster for you when Robertson Stephens wasbought up? Robertson: Oh, we were sold first to BancAmerica, and that was working very well. Thenwhen BancAmerica and NationsBank merged— NationsBank had boughtMontgomery, and we spent a week seeing if we could put the two together,and it just wasn’t working. So BancAmerica, before the merger was consummated, sold us to BankBoston, and the character of the people atBankBoston was much different than the BancAmerica people. BancAmericahad said, “We’re going to leave you encapsulated. We’re not going to changeyour way of doing [things]. You can step out of your capsule and bring capitalin or call on our clients. That was working. They were doing a good job atthat.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: They were letting you alone, essentially. Robertson: They would help us win a piece of business. I remember I even flew to LA ona Saturday morning with the chairman. One of their clients was about to do amerger, was about to be hired by Montgomery, or he’d hired Montgomery todo something, and we came in at the last minute. And as BancAmerica, wetook the business away from Montgomery. But Bank of America was willingto hop on a plane on a Saturday morning to go do things like this for us, and itwas working very well. The BankBoston people were a different caliber. Frankly, they weren’t assmart, and they were a different— So I left soon after we went there. I didn’twant to work with these people. Then that BankBoston and RobertsonStephens became very contentious. They really hated each other. And one daythey just shut the firm down. I happened to be on the phone with the thenpresident. I was in Hawaii, and I was throwing him a piece of business—atender offer as a director of a company. Goldman had quoted $2 million, andthey’d quoted $1.5 million, and we were going to give the business to them. Inthe middle of the conversation he said, “I can’t even finish this conversation.They’ve just shut us down.” And two armed guards walked into his office sohe wouldn’t take any files with him. And so I was there, at the end, bytelephone.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What a dramatic story. Robertson: Very dramatic. They just shut the thing down cold. They should have justspun it off. One of the Minneapolis banks bought Piper Jaffray inMinneapolis, and then later spun it off to shareholders and created a hugeamount of value. BankBoston could have done the same thing, but theyweren’t very smart people. There’s a party given every year in July for all thealumni association of Robertson Stephens—one in New York and one here—acocktail party to celebrate, and people get together. I’ve been a couple oftimes; it’s kind of fun. I wasn’t there at the end, but it’s still fun to go to. Butin short, I’m glad the thing is shut down rather than something with my nameon it being run poorly. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, we’re running out of time, and we’ve skated over Francisco Partners.What more do you want to say about that? It looks like a big operation here! Robertson: [chuckling] Well, we have about $7 billion under management, and we’re aprivate equity or a leveraged buyout fund, only for technology. So we’re usingour background in this. And the guy running the firm now is someone I hiredout of Berkeley years ago for Robertson Stephens. He was the best youngcorporate finance analyst we ever had. We put him through Stanford BusinessSchool. He rejoined us, made him a vice president the first day out of businessschool, which we never had done before. He then did our semiconductorbusiness—he headed our semiconductor group. He left BankBostonRobertson Stephens to join Texas Pacific Group, TPG. Then he and I and athird guy in late 1999 formed Francisco, to do buyouts only in technology.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And was that more or less your decision? Robertson: Well, I was just being a corporate director at the time. I was on three publiclyheld boards, but I was doing investing of my own. It was actually his idea, andI thought it was a great idea.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you want to have his name on tape? Robertson: Yes, his name is Dipanjan Deb, or D.J. Deb.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is he Indian? Robertson: He’s Indian. He’s a real talent. I like to say I was his senior partner, and nowhe’s my senior partner. [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And you’re happy doing this? Robertson: Very happy doing this.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you think about retirement? Robertson: I’m never going to retire, like my father. At eighty years old he was stillstarting companies. It’s much more interesting than playing golf. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, two more sets of questions. One is about this region. We did a bit ofcompare and contrast with the eastern philosophy as opposed to the western.But what is there to say about this region, and the fact that we have a SiliconValley here that people around the world are trying to duplicate? But there areother things about it that have made it such a rich place, until very recentlywith the recession, for high technology and risk investment and investmentbanking, and all the things that you’ve been involved with. Robertson: Right. Well, a spark starts and then it spreads. Going way back into theforties—late thirties and forties, Dean [Frederick E.] Terman at Stanford gotHewlett and Packard together. Then the semiconductor business, which couldhave been in New Jersey, moved out here, and Fairchild then fathered all thatindustry. Once you get something started, it really kind of grows upon itself.Maybe someone had made enough money on his Fairchild options to say,“Okay. I can live off this for a year while I start another semiconductorcompany.” That spark happened here and in Boston. Interestingly, Bostonseems to be quieting down, and some of those venture firms are really movingmore of their operations to the West Coast. This still has the entrepreneurialspark, and that’s picked up in other areas of the country—Seattle. There havebeen spinoffs of Microsoft up there. Austin, Texas is becoming very good. Alot of the semiconductor industry moved to Texas, from Silicon Valley, andyou have a big university. San Diego has been a big center because ofHybritech starting there. Something has to get going to get it going. AnnArbor, I thought the University of Michigan—that spark hadn’t happeneduntil just recently, in just the last about five years.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Does that often boil down to an individual or a set of individuals? Robertson: It boils down, usually, I think, to a company starting, where some peoplemade some money and there’s an example. There was a company in AnnArbor years ago that Hambrecht took public, that was very successful. Ithought that was going to spark things there, and it didn’t. And then theorientation there was toward robotics for the automobile industry, whichdidn’t turn out to be a very big market. It only had three or five customers ormaybe ten worldwide. So that wasn’t that good. Now the biotech spark hasgotten going back there. Warner-Lambert Pfizer used to have a big plant, a bigresearch facility there. So there are these seeds that make things grow.California is way ahead of everybody else because we’ve been here seventyyears.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But Silicon Valley has been really hard hit by this recession. Do you have anyfeeling about the long-term repercussions?  Robertson: Well, I don’t think it’s as bad as other parts of the economy. Technology hasrecovered faster than other parts of the economy, and yes, we’ve been hit. AndCalifornia is a tougher place to live with our tax burden, et cetera, here now.So lots of companies are building plants, they’re going to— Texas is a veryattractive place to go. So rather than expand here, they may do the next plantin Austin, Texas.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see, but they still keep an operation here. Robertson: Absolutely, an operation. And a lot of the manufacturing of semiconductors,for instance, has gone overseas. The design is still here. But now the design isstarting to be done in China and India. They’ve got lots of engineers doinglots of good things. We haven’t lost the leading edge here yet, but it’s going tobe more competitive.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, the last thing—and of course you speak up, too, about more topics—isphilanthropy. What are your interests in terms of philanthropy? Robertson: In terms of philanthropy—education and healthcare. I’m involved withMichigan and have given them some money, and my wife has been veryinterested in UCSF. She’s been chairman of their foundation. She’s still ontheir board. She’s not chairman at the moment, but it doesn’t seem likeanything’s changed. She was a part of different teams that raised $37 millionfor them last year and is working on a $100 million gift from someone at themoment. So she’s very involved in the healthcare world. She also had sonswith mental health problems who are at McLean Hospital, which is Harvard’steaching hospital for mental health, and she’s been very involved in themental health world as well. And those are where education and healthcareoverlap a little bit.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, I can see that. And then, as we were talking with Caroline Crawford [thevideographer] off tape about your interest in jazz. Robertson: That’s right. Jazz is the great American art form. It’s almost more appreciatedin Europe than it is here. We go to the symphony and the ballet, and so muchof these things are European composers or choreographers. But jazz is anAmerican art form, and it was started here and developed here.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is it a lifelong interest of yours? 40 Robertson: Yes, it is. My father played the piano by ear, and he wrote the Northwesternfootball song [“Rise, Northwestern.”] I don’t have the talent in my hands thathe did, but I love music, yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you play an instrument? Robertson: I play the piano privately. [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, this has been a pleasure for me. Do you have anything that you want toadd? Robertson: Well, technology is still one of the two best things that the United States doesbetter than the rest of the world. The other one is agriculture. We havemassive farms using heavy capital equipment. We can grow food cheaper thanany other country in the world, and we’ve become a little bit of a bread basketfor them. But then the other thing that’s really important for our country is oursemiconductor base, our software base. These two things together have keptus ahead of the rest of the world in technology, and we have to run fast to staythere. I think we’ll have that leadership for years, but we’ve got to keep thatleadership. And it’s an extremely important part, and an increasing part of theU.S. economy.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Education, I can well imagine, is an important part of that. Robertson: And education feeds into that. Right. We’ve got to change our visa problems,and let some of these graduate students stay here and contribute to oureconomy. With our visa problems at the moment, the PhDs that we train aregoing back to China and India, Taiwan, Israel. We should keep them here.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I thank you. Robertson: It’s been very much fun. Thank you! 
Interviewer: Mr. Myers—it is September 9, 2008 and this is our first session of maybe two.Would you start with what it was like to grow up in you family, and then gointo your education? Myers: Born in 1942, grew up and raised in St. Louis, went to high school there andthen left in 1960 to go to Dartmouth and studied engineering at Dartmouth.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why engineering? Myers: I’ve always loved engineering and so that’s kind of always been on theagenda. My choices were Dartmouth and Princeton. I kind of liked the liberalarts orientation of Dartmouth and so I went there. And I must say from thetime I left St. Louis, I knew I’d never go back. It was a great place to grow upand it was kind of one of these Old South things where for Labor Day andMemorial [Day] weekend, three generations would get together, a crowd offifty or sixty, which was magnificent. But it was also St. Louis, and it was hotin the summers and cold in the winter, and I just knew that wasn’t for me.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What did your parents do? Myers: My dad was [in] the insurance business and my mom raised us.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How many of you? Myers: Two. I have a brother who is five years younger.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And what happened at Dartmouth? Anything that set a career direction? Myers: Well, yes. I liked Dartmouth, studied engineering, as I said. Dartmouthengineering was a five-year program. You get an AB after four years and a BSafter five. So it was May of my senior year, someone just said, “You know—you’d be great at business. Why don’t you go to business school?” And youdon’t know how these things happen, but it just clicked like, “You’re right!That’s what I should be doing!” And so I quickly applied to Stanford, the onlyplace I wanted to go, to see if I could get in, but May, obviously, was late toget into business school. My backup was to study English at Newbury Upon Tyne in England. That was the craziest thing in the world, because I’m not anEnglish person! [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why did you even think of that? Myers: Just to do something totally different and crazy. And I got accepted there. So Iapplied to Stanford to go in the following fall. I hadn’t taken the boards; Ihadn’t done anything. I took the boards in July, did okay, nothing special. Iwas waitlisted, and then in August, a good friend and I were traveling aroundthe West, camping, and we got to California. Actually, I’d been here oncebefore to San Francisco. We came out here to this area and stayed with afriend and I said, “Well, I’ll go by Stanford. I haven’t heard from them. Iwonder if I got in.” So I went down, and they said, “We just sent you a letter.You got in.” [chuckling] So this was the end of August.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Not much notice. Myers: Yes. I went back to St. Louis and I packed up my things and came out toStanford.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now did Stanford Business School have a good reputation? Why did youchoose Stanford? Myers: It was so-so. It was okay, but it wasn’t where it is today. It was a muchsmaller school. Ernie [Ernest C.] Arbuckle was the dean at that time. A greatguy. But anyway, it was growing in reputation. The main reason was that Iwanted to come to the West Coast. I’d had it with the East Coast, both interms of mentality and how the East Coast people look at things sometimes,and as well the cold weather. Also, Dartmouth was very isolated then, sodating was just impossible at Dartmouth. The nearest girls’ school was a onehour drive or two-hour drive. Boston was four hours then. Today it’s like anhour and a half. So anyway, I just thought this is an abnormal environment. Iwant to go someplace where there are women, and so my only choice wasStanford. I got in somehow.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Very serious objectives. Myers: Yes. [chuckling] A number of sort of serendipity things happened in my life.Like, how did I make a decision on the spot to go to business school and thenat the last minute to get in, and so forth. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you have any idea why that idea clicked? Myers: No, I don’t. [chuckling] Well, it’s a totally different subject, but I think we’revery much guided by energies and forces that we don’t have much touch with.So I think part of one’s ability to flow with life and not be swimmingupstream, not be fighting life all the time, is to somehow find a way to makethose decisions. When something comes along, it’s just there for you. You justknow it. That’s the right thing. I don’t know why. It was very clear to me.That was the thing to do.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I’m guessing that this may feed in a little bit to your later career? Myers: My venture capital story, yes. How I got into venture capital is unlikeanybody else, I think.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You went to Stanford Business School. Did you have any particular directionin mind? Myers: There’s a good reason why you don’t go directly from college to businessschool, because you have no clue what you’re doing and where you want togo. I mean, I really didn’t. I went through business school kind of like college,but I didn’t really get it, because I hadn’t worked in business. I’d had summerjobs as a laborer in St. Louis. That’s all I’d done. So it’s too bad. It was a greatschool and many good connections, and so forth. But there’s a good reasonthat you spend two or three years working before you go back to businessschool.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. Myers: So when I looked for a job after business school, I think I interviewed thirtycompanies. All the way from insurance to oil to retail—all over the map!Because I didn’t know. I ended up going to Hewlett-Packard, because it didresonate with my background—they wanted an engineering background. Theybrought people into a product management kind of role, where you could usesome of your new business skills but also use your engineering skills. So Ithought, Oh fine, that makes sense to me. I could sort of grab it, because Ididn’t really know. Hewlett-Packard was great. That was a fabulous choice.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Are we now in the late sixties?  Myers: Yes. I graduated in ’66. So Hewlett-Packard right after business school, in theengineering development group. I was there for a couple of years—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, since [William] Hewlett and [David] Packard are such huge names, didyou have personal encounters with them? Myers: Yes, it was a small company then. I remember Bill Hewlett coming on the PAsystem and announcing that they had just crossed $300 million in revenue.That’s kind of where they were. They had a few other facilities in Boston andPennsylvania, but most of it was right here. They hadn’t gotten into thecomputer business yet, at that time.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh really. Myers: So this was oscilloscope spectrum analyzers and a lot of test equipment—theoriginal Hewlett-Packard business. Actually I didn’t interact much. We werelocated in a laboratory called One Upper, this new group of MBAs, and wewere given a variety of projects, two-month projects. But it was right adjacentto what they called HP Labs, the main labs. They were developing the HPcalculator, which in its first version was about the size of a typewriter. It wasquite big; this was Bill Hewlett’s pet project. So he would be there every nightat 9, 10, 11 o’clock in the lab, just him working on this calculator. And sooccasionally we were there late, not that often; we would see him, but I didn’tget to know him there. The Vietnam War was going on, and I thought that Hewlett-Packard, as amilitary supplier, would be able to get a deferment for me. Well, it turns out,they never processed the deferment; they didn’t do it properly, and so all of asudden, I got a notice to sign-up for basic training and go to war, which Ididn’t want to do. Another piece of serendipity is that when I wasinterviewing after business school, I went to interview at Fireman’s FundInsurance. I don’t know why. My dad was [in] insurance, but I couldn’t careless about insurance. I met a man; I can’t remember his name. And we had anice talk and I mentioned the war and deferment. He said, “Well, if you everneed to get into reserves at the Presidio, use my name.” The name might popin my head in a minute. This happened at Hewlett-Packard and I thought, Oh my God. So at that time,the reserves were all closing, because everybody was running to the reservesto get out of the war. And this Presidio had closed. So I called—it was Mr.Mortimer. So I called the head guy there who turned out to be the commanderof the West Coast; I didn’t know that. I said, “Mr. Mortimer said for me to call you, that he wanted me to get in the reserves.” He said, “Okay. Show uptomorrow; you’re in.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Just like that. Myers: So I went up there and signed up and got in the reserves, I guess, by the skinof my teeth. It was weeks later I would have been drafted, so another one ofthose fortunate turns of life. I left pretty quickly and did the reserve thing for four months. It’s normallysix, but we went down to Texas and then to Arizona, Fort Huachuca anddifferent places. It was kind of a fun group. In our group everybody had agraduate degree and we were the typing pool. Everybody knew why we werethere—we were there to avoid the war. So they did the typing thing and getout and get on with things. But we had a good time; it was a great group. Wewere the best typists, the best athletes. The best at everything we did there. Ibrought my car down to the base, and we’d go off base every weekend andparty and drive around, so it wasn’t too bad. After four months they let us out.I went back to Hewlett-Packard.What was happening then was that HP was getting into the computer business,because Digital Equipment [Corporation] a couple of years earlier had startedtheir small computer business. IBM had the big things, but [HP had a] smallcomputer business. And so it really was very much Hewlett and Packard wholed HP into the computer business.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why did they think that the time was right to get into it? Myers: Well, I just didn’t know them well enough to [know why they might] thinkthat way, but they were both forward-thinking people. I think Bill Hewlett hadbeen working on the calculator and saw the computing power that was comingalong, and DEC was already out there with the PDP-8, which was verysuccessful. They had, I think, $25 million in revenue their first year or two. Soit was kind of like, this is going to be important. So they started a new divisioncalled the Dymec Division then, which was down on the intersection of ElCamino and Page Mill. I wanted to go to that division, so I transferred out ofthis project management group down to the—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why did you want to go? Myers: The computer. Computers are important. I’d used the computer a lot, andcomputers were pretty new. When I was at Dartmouth in engineering, therewas one computer on campus, an IBM 1410. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that one of the huge monsters? Myers: Yes, big as a couch. It was a small computer for the day, and you put punchcards into it. I did a lot of my engineering projects on that computer, so I knewa lot about computers and believed in computers. So when that division wasstarted, I said, “I want to go down there.” So I went down as themanufacturing manager. Actually it was called manufacturing tests. Theywere just starting to build the first computers, HP computers, which were bigrefrigerator-size things. So our group would meet the Fairchild[Semiconductor] truck at the door and get the chips and load them on theboards and do the testing. I had a test group of about ten people working forme.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you have the feeling then that you were on a frontier? Myers: Yes, yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That this was the beginning of a big thing? Myers: Yes. I didn’t know how big, but absolutely. I wanted to be there. JackMelchor, who was running that division at the time, had a heart attack, andTom Perkins, who was the marketing person, took over as the divisionmanager. And he ran that division I don’t know how long, but five or six yearsat least and built it up to $50 to $100 million. We’ll come back to that, but outof that division, a whole tree of people went into the Valley as entrepreneursand venture capitalists. There’s a whole semiconductor tree that people puttogether out of Fairchild. But then there’s another one coming out of HewlettPackard of people, all over the Valley, that came out of that computer group atthat time.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I’ve read about the Fairchild tree—historians love that. But I hadn’t heardmuch about the Hewlett-Packard tree. In the industry, it’s well known? Myers: I don’t know. I’m not sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You should write a paper! [chuckling] Myers: You can write a paper! [laughter] Anyway, the Fairchild guys were obviouslycomputer people, but the HP—these were the two computer kind of things outhere and so that’s kind of where it all started. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is IBM in the picture yet? Myers: IBM is already there with big computers, so IBM and Burroughs[Corporation] and Scientific Data [Systems], so there were a bunch of bigcompanies with these big monster machines. But nobody doing these smallercomputers with this kind of technology.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was HP already thinking this is going to be for domestic use? This is going togo into people’s homes? Myers: Well, I don’t know about homes. I think the early computers were very much,I don’t know—sort of business and production oriented. I forgot what theysold for, but they were way too complicated for a home. The home computerdidn’t really come along until Apple’s Steve Jobs thing in the mid-seventies.That’s the first one that the home even thought about. These were bigger.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And we’re still in the late sixties? Myers: These are late sixties. And you fed these things with punch paper tape and itwas a whole different world. Everybody’s watch vastly exceeds the power ofthese computers today. But I was down there in the manufacturing group.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And what exactly were you doing? Myers: Well, we were building—I don’t know, ten or twenty machines a month. Andso there was a manufacturing organization that put them together, and mygroup would test them. Testing was actually a fairly elaborate process.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Each one? Myers: Yes. They had to be tested and heat cycled and all kinds of things which youdon’t even bother with today. We built a big heat cycling thing, and we hadprograms written that would exercise them and make them do all differentstuff to make sure that they worked properly. And so I had, whatever, half adozen people working for me doing this sort of final assembly and testportion. I don’t know what the revenues were, but it was a few million at thevery beginning. And then that division moved down to Cupertino with Perkinsrunning it in a new building. It became the Cupertino division, and that’swhen the computer group really took off, and they brought out a number ofnew models. That’s kind of where it all really took off. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now before Perkins left [to co-found Kleiner & Perkins, you stayed—? Myers: I was there until 1970, so Perkins was still there. I’ve forgotten our size, but Imoved into marketing and sales support. And I enjoyed that, but anyway, Ijust felt like leaving. I thought it was sort of getting big enough—I don’t knowexactly the reasons, but it seemed like a time to leave.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you have any observations to make about Tom Perkins in that particularjob? Myers: He’s a brilliant guy. And he was a fantastic division manager.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: In what way? Myers: I didn’t know. I was sort of twenty levels below him! But he seemed decisive.He had a very good team he put together. He’s got a marketing orientation. Iguess I’ve always admired Tom for his incisiveness and so forth, and venturebusiness.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So some of the characteristics that he later used as a venture capitalist you canlook back and see he was using as a division head? Myers: [noncommittal]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [laughter] I’m pushing you. Myers: You can sort of turn it around. He had an operating background from SpectraPhysics and then with Hewlett-Packard. And so, there’s nothing like runningsomething, hiring people, making decisions, building a company, when hebuilt that division. That is one of the things that made him great in the venturebusiness. He knew operations; he knew how to assess entrepreneurs; he knewhow to help entrepreneurs, how to criticize entrepreneurs in a way that [at] thetime most venture capitalists did not understand. So he brought an operatingexpertise to the venture business that had not been there.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And Eugene Kleiner had that background, too, did he not?  Myers: Yes, from the Fairchild side, exactly right. I think that’s been the hallmark ofKleiner Perkins from the very beginning of hiring operating people into theventure business.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And that was new. Myers: Yes, that was new.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Okay, 1970. Were you just getting restless? Were you saying to yourself, I’vedone this long enough? Myers: Yes, I’ve been here for four years, [in the] division for two-and-a-half years,and I was restless. You know, I guess I wasn’t quite clear where my careerwas going. The sales/support thing was interesting, but what next? So I guessI felt sort of uncertain or impatient. So I talked to Bill [William L.] Lowe, whowas the head of placement at Stanford Business School. He’d become a friendover the years; he [has since] passed away. And I just said, “Bill, I’m lookingaround. I don’t know what to do, but if something should come along, let meknow.” It was a very casual sort of thing. I hadn’t told anybody; I was justkind of poking around. And so, a number of months passed, and actually in the meantime Bill Lowetalked to Wally Davis. Tommy [Davis] and Wally started Mayfield in 1969. Iguess I’ll come back to how they started it. They started it in 1969 and theyneeded a computer person. Tommy has an English/law background and Wallyhas an engineering background but from the military side. So they need acomputer person and so they were looking. So Bill Lowe said, “Why don’tyou call Gib Myers?” Wally lost my name. And so another couple of monthswent by and Wally called Bill Lowe and said, “Hey, I haven’t heard fromyou,” or, “I lost the name,” or some such thing, and Bill gave him my nameagain and maybe many others. I guess I learned later, many others. Soanyway, Wally called me and I remember it so clearly, because I was walkingto my apartment in Mountain View, [arms] full of groceries, the phone’sringing, pick it up. Wally Davis has a sort of a distinct gruff, short sound,[imitating Davis], “Hello? This is Wally Davis.” “Okay, hello?” [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you know who he was? Myers: No, no clue. He said, “Bill Lowe gave me your name. We’re looking forsomeone to interview. Do you want to talk to us? We’re in venture capital.”Well, I didn’t know what venture capital was. I’d never heard of venture capital! Okay. You know, I just said, “Okay.” So that’s when I went and hadlunch with Tommy and Wally Davis. They had a very small office in theLadera Shopping Center out on Alpine Road. They had, maybe, a thousandsquare feet. So anyway, [I] went out and had lunch. Let me see, 1970, so Imust have been twenty-eight. And gosh, I’m sort of guessing, but Tommy andWally were twenty years older, so they looked horribly old to me! [chuckling]Mid-forties, like, Oh my God! These two guys talking about venture capital. It seems weird, almost embarrassing to say this, but I didn’t know whatventure capital was. I’d never even heard about it. I know about startingcompanies and all, but in terms of an investment venture process—I mean, noone else was doing it. We’ll come back to that, but in this area, there wasDraper Fisher; Bill Edwards, that group—Bryan and Edwards, a couple ofgroups, but that was it. So anyway, I had lunch with them two or three times. I liked them both a lot. Iunderstood as they described what they were doing, but I hadn’t heard of it. Ididn’t have a network to seek out who they were. And maybe I’ll come backto that too. Davis and Rock was the most successful venture fund ever inhistory, and I think it took a few million dollars and made it a hundred millionin the 1960s in a very short length—eight or nine years. So it was a hugesuccess. But I didn’t know anybody that knew him.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now were Davis and Rock calling what they were doing venture capital? Myers: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So some people knew the term. Myers: Yes. The Davis and Rock partnership. Exactly right. So anyway, as I say, forreasons that sort of dumbfound me, I said, “Okay. I’d love to do this.” In fact,I remember at one point asking them—this sounds so silly— Because theyseemed so old to me, I said, I don’t know what my words were exactly, but,“Are you guys really serious about this? Or is this kind of a gentleman’shobby? Are you really serious about it? I mean, this is my career!” [laughter]“Are you trying to build a business here, or not?” Of course, they were, but itwas one of these things when you’re so naïve, and you don’t know someone’sreputation, you can ask questions that you normally would never ask or havethe guts to ask. So anyway, I joined.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What do you think they saw in you, other than here’s somebody who seems toknow about computers? You probably were not the only person they’d takento lunch.  Myers: I later learned that there was a long list of applicants who really wanted thejob! I barely wanted the job, like “Okay, I guess I’ll do it.” [chuckling] I don’tknow. It’s hard to say. I assume others had some engineering or computerbackground. Tommy Davis’s philosophy was 120 percent on your chemistrywith the people. That was his thing. Many people say that, but Tommy wasjust a wonderful, congenial individual that related well to people but then alsowas a great assessor of people. He had confidence in that. Wally was less thatway, more of an engineer. But anyway, we got along really well. Maybe itwas my naïve questions, or some such thing. [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you think they checked you out? Myers: I don’t know; I never heard.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So now what happens? You’re hired. Myers: Yes, I’m hired.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Are you even clear what you’re expected to do? Myers: Not very clear. Well, they were getting business plans. So first of all there’sthis tiny little office. It’s a room with a secretary. You walk in the door, thesecretary is straight across. My desk was right by the door, right in front of thesecretary. Tommy and Wally each had a closed-door office to the side. Sothere we were. It’s like, “Here are some business plans people have sent in.Why don’t you go visit these people and see what you think?” “Okay.”[chuckling]. And one of my friends, a roommate, had joined Wells Fargo in the venturecapital business. And so I called him and I said, “Well, I’ve got this job, butwhat do you do?” Things like—“How do you do the capitalized value of acompany.” When I was in business school a lot of these things you kind ofhear, but what does it really mean? So anyway, I went back to Dan Tompkinsand said I would—so I just sort of bumbled along. But it was also a differentkind of business then. I mean, if you made two or three investment per year,that was a big year. Not a big year, a normal year. Not like today, you makeone a month or two a month. Some years we’d make one or zero. It was awhole different style of investing. So it was a much slower pace. Obviously, itgave me the ability to get my feet on the ground.Tommy and Wally were both very supportive. We just got along famouslyfrom the very beginning. I was living in San Francisco and commuting down, but both of them lived in Woodside and Atherton. But after a month or so Igot invited to their house for dinner and we became friends. I’d spend thenight at Wally’s house and do stuff like that, so we became better and betterfriends in the whole process.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you remember the companies that you were sent out to vet when you firstarrived? Myers: Oh I guess sort of vaguely. I actually have a list. I could go down them. One[is] Storage Technology [Corporation], which was a tape drive company inBoulder. So that’s one I related to well. I was the young kid. They made theinvestment decision, but I went along, and I was the one to go back and visitand meet with them a number of times. Alza Pharmaceuticals was aninvestment. I really wasn’t involved in that, but that was very successful, withAlex [Alejandro] Zaffaroni—that was when they first started.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Presumably you were going to look at the firms, make some kind ofassessment and then report back to the two Davises. But what sorts of thingswere you looking at and bringing back to them? By then had you picked upwhat were the important things to be watching for? Myers: No. Who knows! [chuckling] It was sort of a learning process. The basics of:Is there a market for this thing? Is this an entrepreneur that can do something,that can build something? I had a brief operating background at HewlettPackard, but that really was helpful in trying to make assessments—is this justan inventor with an idea? Now where do we go with it? And that was also a time where you didn’t build companies as much as they’rebeing built today or in the eighties and nineties. If there was somebody therethat maybe had a good idea but needed marketing strength, or maybe it was anengineer but [he] needed more management, you might say, “Hey, look, welike you, you have a great idea, but you need this [prospective company] tohave a full team. Go out and find that person and come back to us.” Today it’sdifferent. You kind of glue things together and hope it sticks. But back then itwas like, Let’s keep in touch. (It wasn’t a competitive environment.) “Youneed to find a really good manager. If we have an idea, we’ll tell you, butanyway, go find somebody.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: They were calling their operation the Mayfield Fund? Myers: That was Mayfield Fund, right. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why not Davis and Davis? Myers: Well, yes, let me give you some background to that. After Davis and Rock,Tommy kind of semi-retired, went to work for Blythe and Company, abrokerage firm at that time. He and Wally weren’t related and hadn’t knowneach other. I [don’t] quite remember how they met, but they met through acommon bond at Stanford, a Stanford connection. And they both had the ideathat Silicon Valley is going to be really important. Stanford’s endowmentought to be part of Silicon Valley. And so they started Mayfield on thepremise that we’ll get Stanford’s endowment money to be the fund, becauseStanford’s just got to be part of what’s happening. That’s why we’re going todo this. And so as they got that going. They also put together a Stanfordscientific advisory board. So there were about six or eight Stanford professorswho were advisors.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Representing different disciplines? Myers: Yes, chemistry, electronics—different disciplines over there. First the[Stanford] endowment said, “No, this is silly. This isn’t a good use of ourfunds.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was it perhaps also that universities are ivory towers, and we don’t deal withthese business folk? Myers: Well, no. Stanford, I think, has always been unusual.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, it has been.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [Frederick E.] Terman. Myers: Dean Terman had always felt that there should be collaboration between theuniversity and the corporate business world. So that goes way back as Imentioned before we started taping, Tommy worked with Dean Terman in thefifties and the companies that were started out of Stanford. So the issue reallywas just the endowment. Endowment funds didn’t give money. HorsleyBridge gave us money—or Horsley Keogh—in the late seventies, and it reallydidn’t catch on until the mid-eighties as the thing to do. So this was the latesixties. This is a foolish way to use your endowment funds [Stanfordbelieved]. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why did it take so long? Why didn’t universities get it? Myers: Because they didn’t relate that to Silicon Valley. It was just a financialmanagement job. It should be invested conservatively and probably wasinvested mostly in bonds, which was the conservative strategy way back then.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So it was the risk that scared them. Myers: Yes, they didn’t want to take the risk. And venture capital, you know, alwayshas been considered a high-risk business in spite of its success. And so itpercent of our endowment and give it to venture capital, and it’s part of abalanced portfolio.” But those concepts didn’t exist then at all.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. Myers: So anyway, the endowment said no. So Tommy and Wally said, “Well, westill think this is important.” So they went out to raise money, and the firstfund was, I think, $3.5 million, which of course is nothing compared to today.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And that was just going to private investors? Myers: Yes, to private, well, Blythe and Company was an investor, and someinsurance company was, and then a bunch of individuals. But what they didwhich was so unusual: they agreed [that]15% of the profits you get as alimited partner you have to give to Stanford as a donation. So their core themehere was: Let’s support Stanford. Stanford’s got to be part of Silicon Valley.That’s why we’re doing this fund. So they didn’t get the endowment money,but the rest of you guys, you’ve got to make a contribution to Stanford.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was their thinking, well, the university is where the knowledge base islocated? We’re going to profit from that intellectually and also maybefinancially by building companies around this knowledge? Myers: Well, no, it wasn’t quite that sophisticated back then. I think they just believedsome might come from Stanford, but we didn’t spend a lot of time miningStanford for stuff. That’s being done today but not back then.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So it was more just an investment.  Myers: Well, Silicon Valley is going to be a big deal. One way or the other, whereverit comes from. And Stanford’s right here in Silicon Valley. They’ve got to bepart of it. So even if the endowment won’t help us, we’ll give money back toStanford in the process.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was it obvious that Silicon Valley was going to be a big deal? Myers: I don’t think so. It was mostly apple orchards and there was no 280 and all therest. [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So they were just perceptive? They saw where this whole region was going togo? Myers: Well, I think so, but I actually hand a lot to Tommy. Tommy in the fifties[was] with Kern County Land Company. He came out here and worked withDean Terman, and that’s where Tommy’s eyes were opened up and theystarted two companies out of Stanford that say, wow, there’s technology, andwhat you can do with developing companies around it is going to be reallyimportant. So I think he got his eye-opening then. Then Davis and Rockinvested in—I don’t know how many companies, ten or fifteen. But their bighit was Scientific Data Systems, a computer company in L.A. So he’d beenexposed to what could happen. Scientific Data Systems was sold to Xerox fora billion dollars in the mid-sixties. A billion dollars is unheard of! A hugenumber! So, Tommy was pretty savvy at that point [about] what washappening. Wally had more of an operating background but had been around.So that was very much their inclination.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What happens next then? They got the Stanford money— Myers: Oh no, they didn’t get the Stanford money, but they raised outside funds.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh right, yes, I’m sorry. Myers: And gave 15 percent to Stanford. It was a little $3.5 million fund with aStanford advisory board still involved. So anyway, we proceeded off. It was apretty unsuccessful fund. [chuckling] We ran into the ’72 depression—actually, ’72-’73 things were really bad. I printed out some lists ofinvestments and we could talk about a few of them. But the fund really wasn’tvery successful, but it was a $3.5 million fund and people sort of made acouple of percent kind of thing, but for the times it was okay. Nobody was toounhappy. It was in ’72 or ’73 we started to raise Mayfield II, which was going to be a$7.5 million fund. And that was in the midst of the market downturn. Iremember this because Tommy—Tommy was our chief fundraiser—spent ayear looking for money, and he could not raise— He went to insurancecompanies in all these small towns and all around and he was having a heck ofa time raising the $7.5 million.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you getting worried? Myers: I don’t know. It didn’t matter to me. I was young, whatever happened kind ofthing.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You didn’t have a family to support? Myers: Yes—I got married in ’76. So Tommy finally met Phil Horsley with theUniversity of Rochester. There was Phil Horsley and Kevin Keogh, the twoinvestment officers, and they’re the ones that said that they would giveMayfield II, the second fund, money.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now who are they? Myers: They were endowment managers at the University of Rochester. They mightbe the first endowment managers, ever, to invest in venture capital. Someonecould check that out, but real close. They’re wonderful people; they hit it offwith Tommy. We all flew back; we all spent a lot of time with them. And Ithink they gave us—I’d have to look, I don’t remember—just half the fund, ora big amount. And then with that we got some money from the FordFoundation and some others, and the whole fund came together. But it wasreally the Phil Horsley/Kevin Keogh [fund]. They later left and started theHorsley Bridge firm in San Francisco which is a $20 billion fund of funds. Sothey’ve been enormously successful on their own, and they’ve also been acontinuous investor in all the Mayfield funds through all those years. So therelationship goes way back.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you really started something back then. Myers: Yes, absolutely right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now was $7 million—  Myers: Seven and a half million was the size—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Seven and a half—was that a respectable fund? Myers: That was a pretty big fund. There was somebody in Chicago, I can’tremember, who maybe had a $10 million fund—which seemed awfully large.And Reid Dennis was starting IVP [Institutional Venture Partners] rightaround that time. He had $7 to $10 [million]. Kleiner Perkins I don’t think hadquite started. This is ’73-’74. But anyway, that was considered a prettyrespectable size fund.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And Pitch Johnson was around. Myers: Was Pitch on his own then? I didn’t know him then. There was Sutter Hill,because shortly thereafter Dave [David L.] Anderson joined Sutter Hill astheir young person kind of thing.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And so does Bill Draper. Myers: And Bill, of course, was there, and Paul [A.] Wythes, I’m sure. That was atime when, as I said, you would make two or three investments per year.You’d invest $100,000, $200,000, $300,000. You’d do tons of due diligence.My main thing was just checking out the management. I’d spend daysresearching a CEO. I talked to everybody he’d worked with—and for him,above him—mountains of information! We just did tons of homework. AndI’m not sure it was all valuable or not. Today we wouldn’t do that. But it wasa time—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How did you do that? By picking up the phone? Myers: Yes, right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why did you do that much due diligence? Myers: It was just a slower pace.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you had the time.  Myers: You had the time, and the philosophy then was very much management,management, management. And it’s shifted some. But back then it was totallythat. So you spent almost all your time on the management pieces and gettingto know them and spending time with them and all that kind of thing—really,really a big [deal]. It’s still a big deal, but what would sort of come later hasnow been balanced by markets and all kinds of other factors that go intomaking a successful company. Back then those things weren’t emphasized inthe way they are today.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How much were you yourself going on the facts as opposed to your intuition,your reading of the people that you were considering investing in? Myers: Well, you can’t avoid your intuition. It’s always there.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But some people weight it more heavily than others in making a decision. Myers: I think we were very much a firm that weighted our intuition heavily, and thenwe’d do a lot of homework. Was there a fly in the ointment here? Was there aproblem—some things we didn’t know about? Because obviously intuitiondoesn’t tell you everything.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I read that Mayfield tried to move—I guess it would be the twoDavises—towards a less intuitive, more process-oriented way of going aboutbusiness, by at least having meetings. You said that Tommy Davis made a lotof his decisions on the base of his reading of people, on the basis of intuition. Myers: Oh, yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you think there might be a harder core way of going about it? Myers: Well, yes, it’s sort of an evolution. Tommy was, just what you say, veryintuitive and would just like someone, some situation, and want to do it. Wallywas more of the engineer, and like, “I don’t believe that. I don’t like that.”And I was kind of the in-between person, the younger one. And so as theyears went on and we added a few more partners— Glenn [M.] Mueller wasan important new addition, and he had a consulting, strong businessbackground. So as the young people sort of gained strength, we began to put in moreprocess like, “Let’s have a partners meeting to talk about these things.”[laughter] There was none of that [before]. You’d walk in the office, let’s do this, let’s do that, okay fine kind of thing. And I was the young person, so Icould be ignored or listened to when they wanted to. But then we come intothe late seventies—I guess they had a bit more confidence in me, we addedmore people, and then we began to do a little more of this process stuff. Ithink intuition continues to be important, but you’ve got to back it up. That’snot sufficient.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Would you say that today Mayfield perhaps leans more towards the intuitiveside than other venture capital firms? Myers: I can’t—you know, I’ve been out of Mayfield for ten years. And Mayfieldstruggled badly. The 2000 fund, the 2001 funds—everybody’s funds werebad. Mayfield’s were really bad. And so Mayfield stumbled. I think they’vepicked it up now; they just finished raising some money; they’ve changed abunch of partners. But they’ve gone through some tough times, and I thinkthey’re coming back real strong.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: As a spin-off from the bubble? Myers: Let me see—I left Mayfield in ’98 and started the Entrepreneurs Foundationand just zoomed out doing that. I think we had some management issues; wehad some hiring problems in part because that was a time when everybodywas growing, hiring lots of people. So some of the people brought in weren’tthe right people. Everybody was running a hundred miles an hour, so I thinkMayfield kind of lost their way for a couple of years there. I’ve heardcriticism and concerns and all that sort of thing. I think they’ve got it backnow. They have addressed some of the management issues and hired somedifferent people, and I think they’ve got a really good team. It’s hard for me tosay what it’s like now. I would say more in general though, Mayfield was characterized [as] a firmthat the entrepreneurs liked to work with. We were always on their side. Theynever had to look over their shoulder that they’d get knifed in the back ortaken advantage of. We were very fair, and we were good people to workwith. I think then, and this is eighties and nineties, we weren’t as good asSequoia [Capital] in marketing. I mean Don [Donald T.] Valentine’s amarketing genius. His imprimatur was: Let’s get a huge, fast-growing marketthat’ll make up for a lot of sins. We’ll also think about management and otherthings, but fast-growing market was his mantra, which was very good. Andthen Kleiner Perkins was here with a strong operating thing, and so theywould operate or they had the insights to operate.I don’t think Mayfield—we had some of these characteristics. We hiredYogen Dalal and some operating people and so forth. Mayfield was much 20more a great firm to work with. Everybody liked us: we want Mayfield part ofthe deal. But then they’d get some other kind of expertise from a KleinerPerkins or a Sequoia that we weren’t giving them. So maybe that’s one way. But just to go back to one piece in the mid-seventies, which I alwaysremember well in this smaller business: every month the venture industry ofthe Bay Area would get together for lunch at Nob Hill, at the Fairmont. Therewere only twenty in the room, and it was a very different time because it wasopen. Everybody talked about what they were looking at, what their opinionswere. If you weren’t looking at it, they’d say, “Well, you can look at it. Comeon, come on.” There was no competition. Everybody was sharing, workingtogether, and actually, much to the detriment of the entrepreneurs, we wereworking together like, “Okay, we’ll offer them a buck a share. I’m sure they’lltake it. There’s nobody else around,” kind of thing. But in complete contrastto where we are now in the nineties, where it’s so highly competitive, and soforth. That was just the antithesis. It was very much a gentleman’s business.That’s what it evolved from.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And what is that a function of? Expansion? You’re now no longer an intimatelittle club? You’re a huge industry. Myers: It’s money. It’s tons of money that’s come into the business, a huge amount ofsuccess, and then the general growth of the business. You could sort of saythat almost any business when it becomes successful and gets surfeited withmoney, it becomes more competitive. And now it’s become ruthlesslycompetitive. For at least fifteen years [venture capitalists have] had vastlymore money to invest than they knew what to do with. The downturns havenever shrunk the pool of money available much, in fact, frankly, at all. Sothere’s always been far too much money available, and it makes it now, andhas since the mid-nineties, so competitive, because we’ve all got too muchmoney. We’ve got to get the deal; we’ve got to control the deal; we don’twant to share it. On and on.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Another thing I read is that, at least in the early days, Mayfield focused onearly stage investment. What was the rationale there? And was it ever aserious consideration to do later stage investing? Myers: It’s always been early stage. Later stage investing wasn’t a term, you know.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] I wondered if it was. Myers: It wasn’t segmented. It becomes sort of semantics. Early stage back thenwould be the first dollars, but you had more of a team. There was more around it. There was the expectation that the team would have left their [former]company, would have worked in their garage, would have built a prototype ontheir own. More would have happened on their own. And so now we’re ready,which would almost be today’s second-stage investment. That was justexpected then. So we were all kind of in this same realm of investment, and acompany would need another round or two of capital and the same groupwould put that money up. Maybe someone new came in, but you didn’tdistinguish among stages. There weren’t that many players and there weren’tthe different funds that thought about it that way. That didn’t come in till theeighties, I don’t think.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Mayfield would pull in other VCs and investors? Myers: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It wasn’t doing this all on its own. Myers: Oh no, not at all. No one would think of it. I don’t think anybody did it bythemselves. Everybody worked together.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It was too much of a risk and you probably didn’t have the capital.million, and there’d be four or five groups in it. There’d be a lead investor,somebody on the board.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did Mayfield worry about whether it was a lead investor or not? Myers: No, it just wasn’t part of the lexicon.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was this part of the old-boys’ network? Myers: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: If you had a deal, you would call up Joe Blow at another firm. Was that theway it was done? Myers: Yes, share it, put it together. Exactly. Remember, it was Bill Edwards, thiswhole group—part of it was what people were doing. Back then, if you were on four or five boards, it was considered—five boards was heresy! You can’tpossibly do a good job and be on five boards. That’s crazy! I remember BillEdwards being on five boards. People just thought: What’s wrong with him?Of course, today, you can be on ten or twelve boards and get by.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And that is impossible, isn’t it? Can you be doing a good job on ten boards? Myers: Well, maybe not, but everybody’s doing it. That’s hard to say. So BillEdwards might be on a bunch of boards. He’d have a new deal that maybehe’d found, so he’d call Mayfield or Sutter Hill or somebody and say, “Look,I can’t do it, go on the board—I’ve got too much to do, but why don’t we alldo this one if you pick up this.” It was very much of a sharing, let’s worktogether, you do this one, I’ll work on this one kind of thing. There wasrelatively little, almost no competition.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, aside you wanting to spend more time on the Entrepreneurs Foundation,did you leave Mayfield because you see that venture capital is becoming adifferent thing and you’re not as anxious to be part of it for all those reasonsthat you’re talking about? Myers: No, hmm. Maybe a little. At that point it had been twenty-eight years, and Iwas tired. My role had been managing partner since the mid-eighties. Tommywas ill and inactive in ’83 or ’84. Wally left in around ’86, and sofrom ’84, ’85, I was the managing partner. I spent a lot of my time onmanaging and growing people and hiring people and building the firm, and Ifeel that was one of my contributions. And I was also on boards and did that. Ifrankly feel my legacy is almost more with the quality of the firm that we builtup until I left. So anyway, I was tired and it’s just one of these things whereyou go to work at 8 or 9:00 and you go in a meeting and you fall asleep rightaway, like, why am I falling asleep? [chuckling] Another business plan! Thesame old routine I’ve heard a thousand times. I’m tired of this. And there’s somuch to do in the world. So many different opportunities. I’ve always felt thatthere’s just a hundred things to do. And so I was tired and I felt, okay, time toleave. I didn’t expect to leave quite as quickly. That sort of gets to theEntrepreneurs Foundation story. I thought I’d have the usual two- or threeyear transition and all that, and then I just dove in to get this thing going.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, we’ll definitely talk about that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You’ve mentioned in passing the tough years of the early seventies, what theexternal economy is doing [that is] is going to shape how things are going for you. It’s those contextual things that tend to fall out of the stories people tell.One of the reasons that I try to throw rather a broad net is that you can’tanticipate accurately what will interest future historians, sociologists, whoeveris looking at this oral histories! Myers: [chuckling] That’s very interesting, yes, right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So it’s great what you’re doing. [brief interruption for microphoneadjustments]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You mentioned in passing building companies. Am I right in thinking thatthat’s a big part of what Mayfield is trying to do? It’s not just a matter offinding the money and investing it, it’s building a company to be productive.Talk about that part of the process, please. Myers: I think that evolved in the seventies. It was a little more of a passiveinvestor—on the board but not as proactive—as we evolved. In the seventies,Glenn Mueller, Grant Heidrich, our team sort of evolved and we becamemuch more active about how to help a company, which is kind of very muchthe theme. But back then, that was somewhat new—all the things you mightdo as a venture capitalist, whether on a board or not, to build a company. One huge thing is hiring people. And so, actually, I hired a guy named Bill[William D.] Unger in the mid-eighties who had a search background. Mythought was maybe a search guy can not only assess people better, but he hasa search process, he has a search network, so he can speed up the process ofgetting people into these companies. The faster we get good people in, thebetter. Bill was a good guy, he has been with Mayfield until I left or beyond.But the point was to look for a variety of ways where you can get the bestpeople in there quickly. And then whatever else you can do—like a DonValentine had marketing expertise, and he’d bring that to bear, and we didn’thave much of that operating expertise. We had some, but I think if anything, itwas how you get good people in the company as fast as possible. So actually,I was saying it was a very proactive process, and as we went on, we spentmore and more time on it. It was obviously an important part.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: When you were looking for new people, were you looking for a person to filla particular niche? Myers: Yes. You fired a CEO and you’ve got to replace him with somebody. Butmore often the team, the company is growing, and you need a new marketingperson or sales or a new executive in the team. Often the existing executives are so busy a) they don’t maybe recognize it quickly enough, they don’t wantto take the time to work on it—kind of like it’s hard to get to these things. So Ithink one of the things that we were good as was to flag this early, get theirattention on it. For many years, that’s where if I was on the board I’d bringBill Unger in, and Bill was really good at talking about: How do we get a newperson in here? What are the characteristics? How do you define what youwant; what [are] the must-haves, like-to-haves. All that. And then we’d helpthem find search firms; we’d help them direct the search firm. So we werevery proactive; we’d interview most of the candidates. It was a really veryactive process of getting people in.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You’re putting it in the past. Myers: Well, only because I’m past. [chuckling] Actually, I don’t even know todaywhat [Mayfield does]. I presume there’s some of that, but the investment paceis so high, like at least one a month, maybe two a month, that, for all theventure firms, you just don’t have time for any of that. And there’s alsoarguments today—pretty much I’m just out of touch—that the funds havegotten bigger. Well, they got real big, the bubble, up to a billion dollars andnow they’re back to $300 or $400 million. But see, if you’re putting $300 to$400 million to work in four or five years, [it] is very difficult. You’re so busyputting that money to work, and finding the next new investment, and thenbeing on some boards that the proactive process I just talked about was muchmore of the eighties and early-nineties. We’d make five investments per year,and we’d have a team of six or eight people, so we could do that. I’m not surehow much that’s done today.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You make it sound as though it’d be very difficult to give that kind ofattention. Myers: Well, yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you starting to say something? Myers: Well, what’s evolved also is a group of seed investors—there’s another wordfor them. It’s individuals that have made money; I’ll think of it in a second.And so there is now another subgroup, usually not as well organized, thatsometimes does this seed round investments.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Angels?  Myers: That’s it—angel investors that do some of the really early-stage stuff that I’mnot sure how many venture funds do these days.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Would the tendency be for Mayfield to work intensely with a company untilthe IPO? Or only dip in when there seemed to be a need? Myers: Well, you know, you kind of prioritize. If things are going well, you don’thave to work quite so hard. And then when you get to the IPO, if it’s a goodcompany, often then— In the eighties and nineties, the strategy would be, ifit’s a good company, you want to stay on that board at least for a few years.Well, first of all, we still held stock in it, so if you think you can be helpful—But it also added to the [company’s] reputation. So as the business got more competitive, and it swung more from aroundwhere the entrepreneurs had the upper competitive advantage, theentrepreneurs would say, now what kind of venture fund do I want? Thenthey’d look at you and say, “Well, you were on the board of so-and-somicrowave or a fiber optic company. You must know a lot about that. I wantto work with that person at Mayfield,” or at Kleiner, whatever it was. So in the mid- and toward the end of the nineties, the entrepreneurs very muchcalled the shots. We were, everybody was running around trying to puffthemselves up and make the venture capitalists look attractive to theentrepreneurs. We didn’t have to bother with all of that in the eighties, luckily.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How important did you feel it was to be familiar with the basic technology ofa company? Did that factor in? Myers: I think it’s essential. You’ve got to understand their business. So I think that’sabsolutely essential.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Does that explain why a Tommy Davis—I forget what his background was. Myers: He was an English major and law, and then he did the oil exploration and allthat.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I shouldn’t make it an either/or, because I’m sure a lot of it was hispersonality. But if he didn’t have a strong technical background, wouldn’t hehave been thrown into a more intuitive way of going about this? In contrast toyou with your engineering and your HP experience.  Myers: Absolutely. Aside from his phenomenal personality, Tommy wouldn’t havebeen very competitive in the mid-nineties. That’s when your marketing andtechnology, or business, or whatever—all the venture capitalists were trying tohone up, like a bird putting their feathers up: here’s what we have here; here’swhat our firm has; here’s the expertise of our firm, so we could attract theentrepreneurs. And Tommy would have had a harder time with all that, that’sfor sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: The information about your wanting to have more of a process came from TheNew Venturers: [Inside the High-Stakes World of Venture Capital], which is abook by John [W.] Wilson. Myers: I don’t know if I’ve looked at it or not.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I wondered if you could pick out, once there was more of a process atMayfield, a prototype meeting in which the partners got together anddiscussed the possibility of an investment. Please give me a picture of how thediscussion might go. Myers: [chuckling] I don’t know. It was never that formalized. Well, we’d have aweekly partners’ meeting. It used to be all morning on Monday, andeventually it became all day on Monday. We’d have a lead partner, and we’dalways have a second partner that was working with them. There’s always ahopper full of stuff. So you’ve got four or five things that you consider hotand important that people are actually working on. So the lead partner wouldreport on those particular deals they’re working on, what had come up, whatwere the issues. Others in the partnership would chime in and raise theirquestions and review prior questions that had been raised. And so that would be a process that, until things got feverishly competitive, atleast in the late eighties and nineties where we’d go on for a number of weeks.And if someone wasn’t happy, was concerned, not happy, they might join theteam. And so, we kept track of who was on a team and who was doing whatand working on what deals. That was part of the organization of the wholeprocess. But out of that, we’d begin to peel off what the issues are with agiven company and where we kind of [were] working through them. I don’tknow. Something like that. It’s hard to say it’s so structured, but it was verymuch of a process, and we had little charts and keeping track of who’sworking on who and what was going on.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I read that you’ve been involved in something like 300 deals.  Myers: No. Me? I don’t know. That many? Could be. I don’t know how many.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I found three articles on the Entrepreneurs Foundation, and that’s where I sawthat statistic.[laughter] Myers: Beats me!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You don’t keep track, obviously. Myers: I think Mayfield made over 500 investments over its lifetime, but that’s just agross number—it doesn’t mean much. It’s a marketing number. [laughing]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Even if it’s half of that, it’s an impressive number. Did you have a role thatwas distinct from the other partners? Myers: Well, I was very much the managing partner. People have differentpersonalities. You get to know each other. One person may be kind of sloppyon their homework or gets real excited about something, so you’ve got to dothe balancing with every person, sort of get the right information, make surethe rest of the partnership’s coming along. So a big part of my role waskeeping that balance, so the stronger partner, maybe more senior, moreforceful, more outspoken, didn’t overwhelm the process and not have otherpeople speak up or get their input. And vice versa for someone who wasn’t asstrong but maybe had good ideas. And so I spent a fair amount of timedrawing out or balancing—“Last week you said this. Have you had thatresolved?” kind of thing. But then I also spoke up for myself, and just by dint of time, age, or whatever—somehow for some reason [people] listen to you more when you get older.It probably isn’t appropriate, but it seems to work that way! [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, you probably had a track record that they recognized. Myers: I don’t know. There are times in a meeting where you just say, “Come onguys. This doesn’t make any sense. Why are you kidding yourself? This isfundamentally wrong. What are you thinking about?” And luckily, I think wehad unusually good partner dynamics. In fact, I’ll come back to that—so thatno partner would dominate, and I didn’t dominate. But some would push backand say, “Gib, I don’t care what you think. This is it. I’ll do some more work.”Or, “I’ll prove it to you.” And so I think one of the strengths we had is howthe group would work together.  In fact, we so liked each other—there was a period of fifteen years when if wewere having a party, we’d say, “Let’s invite the Mayfield partners. Who elseshould we invite?” We were just the best of friends and the wives were best offriends. It was just a wonderful, cohesive group. Not everybody was as strongas others, and some people were performing much better than others. But—we’re all on one team, let’s work together and not worry about one personhaving substantially more good deals than somebody else.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you suspect that that’s unusual? Myers: Very unusual. Now that fell apart after a while. Appropriately—I don’t knowappropriately or not. After a while you sort of say, “Let’s start to keep track ofthings.” And we hadn’t tracked carefully how many good deals a, or b, or cperson brought to us, or evolved into all these characteristics: what theybrought in, what they supported, what boards they were on. But anyway, thereare lots of ways you can track these. We started tracking, and it all becamemore divisive. [chuckling] Well, wait a minute, so and so has had half thegood deals in this partnership—shouldn’t they have more ownership?Shouldn’t they be paid more? And this person hasn’t done a thing for the lasttwo years! They shouldn’t be paid as much. I don’t know how you avoid that,but that was the beginning of the end. [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What era was that happening in? Myers: Oh, starting in the mid-nineties. I don’t know.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Are you painting a picture of Mayfield when it was working well as still beingsomewhat the exception to the rule? Myers: Oh, I think so. Those were times when our arch competitors were Sequoia andKleiner Perkins. They were very competitive within each partnership; theydidn’t like working with each other; partner meetings were very rough andtumble—a whole different atmosphere. It’s hard to say that was any better orworse. We had a certain style that we really liked and worked well for us.They obviously did really well themselves in that time. But I think theMayfield partners would not have fit into those partnerships.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: No, it doesn’t sound that way. Myers: So we kind of made it work with what we had. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: On the Mayfield Website, which maybe has changed in the ten years [Myerslaughs] so it may not apply, but I quote, “We view ourselves as theentrepreneur’s partners.” Myers: Yep, that goes back. They kept that. I’ll be darned. That’s very much how wefelt. Entrepreneurs would say that they first and foremost really liked workingwith us, and these other firms they didn’t trust or they would get a knife in theback or something would happen. They couldn’t trust them. Now, those otherfirms also brought things that they liked, so it balances, but this was ourhallmark. I guess it maybe still is. [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And was some of this confidence just about money? I mean by that, if youinvested in a firm, was there some kind of understanding, unless things wentterribly wrong, that you would be there for x number of years? Myers: Oh absolutely. That was expected of everybody. You wouldn’t be a goodventure firm, because in any given round, others have come in, so maybeyou’re the lead and you’ve just raised a bunch of money, maybe one moreperson joins the board, but you’re kind of representing a bigger group thanjust yourself.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. Myers: And so if you don’t do your job, you won’t be asked next time. You won’t beas attractive to work with, because you don’t follow through, you don’tsupport the deal. On the other hand, from the entrepreneur’s point [of view],sometimes though, the venture capitalists were always gunning for them orquick on the trigger. The personal dynamics between the board member andthe entrepreneurial team—that’s where we kind of won the game, because wealways had good dynamics. They liked to work with us; they’d haveconfidence in us; we’d have dinner with them. We’d do lots of things in apartner relationship, and other firms didn’t have that kind of relationship.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You’re painting a vivid picture of a friendly relationship. Is there also anemotional component to this? Meaning do these companies become to youmore than just an investment? Myers: Yes, sure. It sort of varies with the kind of relationship, but particularly, asyou get to know a management and you work with them. First you’ve got aperformance pressure. You do feel the pressure of your company’s doing well.Sure, yes, absolutely. Not all. Some. But absolutely true, yes. 30<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And what about—I imagine that one of the crises in this trajectory of a youngcompany is when there has to be a management change. Does that represent acrisis for you too? To have to tell somebody, “Okay. You’re out.” Myers: Well, I don’t know. I guess I haven’t felt that. A)You always wait too long, sothat by the time you’re having the sit-down talk, you know you should havedone it six months ago. But then six months ago you couldn’t have done it.The other employees in the company are coming by your home at night andsaying, “You know, I’ve got to talk to you about this person. This is just notworking. We’re about to leave. The company is going to coll[apse]—you’vegot to fix this.” So I go, “Okay.” [chuckling] So—you know—wake up!We’ve gone through the process so many times. It’s just that it always seemsto get to that point. So by the time that happens, you know you’ve got to do something. It’s in thebest interests of the company, and it’s in the best interests of that person,because that person’s going to fail horribly, or they’re going to swallow hardand get it over with now, and let’s move on with things. We felt we had, inmost cases, very good personal relationships with management. And so, itwasn’t easy, but they would trust us in not saying we’re trying to pull a fastone or, “Oh, you never liked me anyway. I knew you were always againstme.” We didn’t have that kind of thing, so we’d engineer the process. But thatengineering was quite complicated. You often had to get other board membersto go along. Some of the management team had already taken sides, and soyou’d meet with this group or that group. It was often a very laborious processof engineering a CEO change, even later, when there was a problem.Anyway—that was a big part of it. A lot of time.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What about social impact or lack thereof of a company? Does that enter intothe mix of things you consider? Myers: No. [chuckling] I tried to change it for ten years, and I almost—it’s acomplicated question. It’s like raising children: if you raise them with theright values, the community and a sense of value by the community can fit ineven at the early stages. You might not do much, but you set the seeds. I couldelaborate on the EF [Entrepreneurs Foundation] program, but nevertheless, Ifelt that was a culture that does fit with early—I believe firmly it does. Butpeople are so focused on, and working so hard to do, what they’re doing, thatthey can’t squeeze it in very well. So EF has worked with 180 companies, and at least two thirds of them havebeen very successful. They feel it’s added a lot to their culture and made thema better company, and so forth. But I’d really hoped we’d reach kind of atipping point, where every venture capitalist and every lawyer just said, “This is the thing you ought to do. The community is part of where we live. Youwill be a better company, a stronger company, for the community being partof your culture,” even in a small way—it grows later. And I just cannot getwidespread adoption from that community.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because of— Myers: They’re just totally focused on what they’re doing. They’re spending twentyfour hours a day; they’re getting divorced. We don’t want to fit one morething in. So there are some entrepreneurs that do believe that, and we havegreat spokesmen that think it’s the best thing. I mean, everybody works tobuild a culture—they have company meetings, they have beer gatherings, theyhave all kinds of things they do for the culture. So why isn’t some communitystuff, some volunteerism, maybe then a variety of things could be part of thatculture. Some believe it, but I haven’t gotten it to be everybody. So EF,actually, has broadened our strategy. We now work with larger companies,public companies, all kinds of companies, because we’re kind of the preeminent group in terms of how to do community involvement with yourcompany. But we can’t stick just with the early-stage companies, becauseeach one continues to be too hard to fight.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, let’s stop there for this time.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I thought that we’d start this time with some more general questionsabout venture capital, and then end up with your community-related work.Some of these questions will probably sound really basic to you, but I’massuming that eventually this whole interview series will get a wide viewingand not everybody’s going to be up to speed with venture capital. So thequestion is: What are the key things that you look for when an entrepreneurcomes to you? Myers: Hmm. Well, you actually have to parcel it by time frame. It shifted.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All right. That’s good. Myers: In the seventies and early eighties, particularly the seventies—I think I saidsome of this before—you’d have an entrepreneur or an engineer/inventor typecome, and as a venture capitalist, we all knew we had to have a team to makethis happen. So in those days, you might well tell them to go away and go find a marketing person, or a CEO, or somebody to run it, or whatever the rightcombination was. It was a less competitive world, and I think that’s, frankly, abetter system, where they go out and they struggle, they find the right personto work with, that they can get along with. Then as they had team members, you invested, and you helped them build theteam. But there, in that case, we were looking for highly unique products withonly a few people in the world [who] know how to make them, addressinglarge markets that you can get to. Pretty simple stuff. But that’s where a lot ofthe technology came in. Back then, at that point, you really had theopportunity for doing truly unique things, and there was only a handful ofpeople in the world that would know something about this or that kind oftechnology. Then came the eighties and even more in the nineties as it sort of progressed,or as the business got more and more competitive, you’d work with anentrepreneur at the very beginning that you knew couldn’t run the company,and you’d hopefully have an understanding they were going to bring inmanagement at the right time. And so then your role as a venture capitalist, avery important role, was to begin to help build that management team, whichwas always risky. It doesn’t always work when they don’t like your choice.And so lots of issues come up. But it’s kind of evolved to that. Then [it] evolved even further, where in the nineties, with all the things goingon, is the venture capitalists who were out looking for technology and lookingfor somebody at Stanford or some place that they could back and build thecompany around and then add all the rest of the pieces, which is inherently aneven riskier strategy, but the competitive pressures of the whole businessforced people [to that]. We used to have incubator space here. In fact, half thisfloor that you walked through were small companies. We’d put them in ouroffices and work with them and help them to get going in this kind offormative stage.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And was that a very desirable thing for an aspiring company to do? Myers: Well, for an aspiring company it’s very desirable; it’s a good deal. They canstart early and they get the support systems of Mayfield and everything else.We also had entrepreneurs in residence. We’d have a CEO or someone thatwe liked a lot and we wanted to hold onto him, we’d give them an office, paythem something to do homework, help us do due diligence. So sometimes, notalways but sometimes, that entrepreneurial group would either support theengineering group, those with the ideas and sometimes they’d match up andsome would come across. I can’t think of examples right now. So it was greatfor them.  I think it was inherently a more risky strategy for us, but a number ofcompanies came out of it. The MIPS Computer Systems that I’ve mentioned.This was three people from Stanford—John [L.] Hennessy, the president ofStanford, among them, who had an idea of a new processor design. One of ourpartners, Grant Heidrich, knew John and said, “Why don’t you come to ouroffices. We’ll help you develop it.” It was just kind of like they had proved itin prototype over there. That’s all they’d done. So they came over and spent ayear with us, and then we helped build a management team around it. It was acompany that was successful for us, went public, acquired by—so forth. Andin the biotech field we had a number of those, so it definitely worked. It’s anawful lot more work and lots of them don’t work, but it sort of evolved to that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: In the MIPS case, it was personal contact, but is that the usual way that abudding company or an entrepreneur with an idea came to Mayfield? Myers: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: He knew somebody at Mayfield or she knew somebody? Myers: Absolutely. Everybody jokes, but we have never funded a company from abusiness plan that was mailed to us.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Never! Myers: No. That would be kind of like—what’s this? It’s all about the people, sounless you get that personal connection started, you don’t get started.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I guess if you don’t open the envelope you will never know, but what ifthere was just a really hot new idea? It would seem that you might be losingout on things. Myers: Well, we opened all the envelopes. We always did. But you know, it’s part ofthe process. Part of how Silicon Valley works is that the person that wants tostart a company, has to find a way. You mail your resume around for a job andyou almost never get a job. It’s some connection that happens. Theentrepreneur needs to find those connections. That’s part of the process. On the other side, as we got more competitive, we made ourselves more andmore visible, easier to find, and so we looked to have press in the papers andtalk about our expertise. We had people at Stanford and Berkeley all over theplace visiting the engineering schools, meeting people, saying, “Here we are. We’re looking for projects. We’re looking for things to do.” And so as I said,it got more competitive. We were out there looking ourselves to make thoseconnections easier and earlier.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right. I have noticed at Haas [School of Business] the corporate presencethere, the number of quasi-social occasions in which budding businessstudents can meet companies. Myers: Well, we started the Mayfield Fellows Program. And there’s one at Haas now.Both the engineering school and the business school are part of it. And there’sone at Stanford. We put up, I don’t know how much—millions of dollars,quite a bit of money to get these programs going, and then they become aMayfield Fellow. They’re still doing what they’re doing, but they get afellowship award. I don’t check all that happens now. I’m out of date on it, butwe end up with a real presence in the program, and then the fellows come overhere and spend time and this and that. These are great people that we want tohave them know about us, kind of thing.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That’s part of the program? They come to Mayfield to spend a period of time? Myers: Yes. They do some dinners, they might do a half-day conference for fellowsand bring in speakers. I’m out of date, but in most respects, these are peoplethat are in places that are important to us, in some of the key engineering areasand working with really great professors. They often have their eye to doingsomething of an entrepreneurial nature, and so we want to know who they are.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you have any statistics about how those fellowship programs actually payoff? Myers: No. I think people here would, because they’re still active and have now beengoing for about eight or ten years, but I’m out of date.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is Mayfield in any way unusual in sponsoring fellowships of that nature? Myers: I’m not sure. I know back when we started this, I was transitioning. We wereanxious to put our name on it, which forced us to put some more money up todo it. So there may not be. But other venture capitalists find their own way,and I can’t rattle them off, but you know, Kleiner Perkins, Sequoia. They’reall around. All of these schools, just going back to a prior conversation, haveintegrated themselves to the community, the corporations that come in therethey use that as part of the outside classroom, so they’re all very open to it. Sothe venture capitalists are all around, one way or the other. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: The historical literature gives Stanford pride of place in being venturesome interms of reaching out to industry. Berkeley is regarded as slower on the draw.Do you have enough contact with the Berkeley campus to know who mighthave been behind pushing for greater interaction with the businesscommunity? Myers: Not really. One of our advisors was [A.] Richard Newton, who was dean ofthe engineering school at Berkeley. And he died, unfortunately, a year and ahalf ago. He had been with us for fifteen years. He was a professor atBerkeley and then he worked his way up. Great guy. I don’t know who wasthere before or what happened, but he had that foresight. He raised a few hundred million dollars, built a corporate computer-aideddesign center and brought corporations into it and venture capitalists. He wasthinking that way, and so I think they very much have a presence, but prior tothat they were very quiet. I don’t know why or who was there. And Stanfordwas in our back yard. It was much easier. We all had the Stanfordconnections, and so forth.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Back to the general venture capital questions. I think I know how you’re goingto answer this. Would you say that venture capital is a spur to innovation?That it has a good process for selecting firms or entrepreneurs that are likelyto be innovative, or is it more due to management developing a firm so that itis productive. Myers: Both. [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That’s what I suspected you were going to say! [chuckling] Myers: Yes, it is both. First is the screen—is this thing any good, addressing a bigenough market, can you build a company around it, can you attract capital?All those kinds of questions. And often the entrepreneurs aren’t in a positionto answer those very well. They might have a great idea, but they don’t have abroader perspective.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And you don’t expect it of them? Myers: Not necessarily.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That’s your role.  Myers: Yes, exactly. Somebody used to say is, “One way to become a really goodventure capitalist is to see all the business plans there are.” And so we wouldactually try to measure what percent of all the plans, or all the opportunitiesthat we see—80 percent, 90 percent—because if you see most of them, aftersome time you begin to figure out—Hey this is some good stuff, this isn’t sogood. Just a simple piece of the equation. So you don’t expect entrepreneursto know that, so it very much is a screen where the venture capitalistshopefully have some perspective knowledge. Right, all that, but they do havethe perspective to screen it and say, “This has a chance.” But then once you’ve done that, that’s the start of a long process. That’s whereI think the venture capitalists really have their added value, [which] is to helpbuild the team. And I think I mentioned before being—I think we sort ofspecialized on helping build a team. Other venture capitalists did too. Sequoiawas really good at the marketing side of things, because that was DonValentine’s background, and Pierre’s [Lamond]. Kleiner Perkins had theoperations stuff, so they were very operational, very hands-on. They would bechairman of the board and almost running things at the time, which othersdidn’t. But in all regards, it’s just kind of like each person is trying to find away, or each group find a way, to build this thing and make it successful. Sothat’s why it’s both.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I read somewhere that—and I can’t even tell you what stage in Mayfield’shistory it was—it had a reputation for being very strong in communication. Myers: You mean communication sector?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: No, I meant being very interactive with entrepreneurs. Myers: We worked at that. Kleiner might be the operations people; a little unpleasantto be with and you didn’t want to necessarily go to a party with them. Sequoiakind of that way too, but fantastic marketing. We were the friends of theentrepreneurs. That’s how we positioned ourselves. We fired our share andhad our differences, but we really felt like we were in a partnership and we’dwork with a team and with the chief person to make this so they’d have trustin us and if we say, “It’s time to step aside, and here’s why. Here’s what weshould be doing,” that we wouldn’t fight about it too much but like, “Okay, Iunderstand.” Have a relationship that we could talk it through. So that’s verymuch how we positioned ourselves.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you a little unusual in having experience in a high-tech company?Tommy Davis, as we talked about, was in land management.  Myers: Right, exactly. And then, you know, Institutional Ventures, IVP [InstitutionalVenture Partners]—Reid Dennis started that—although some of the partnersdid [have high-tech experience]. But it’s a mixture, but by and large you’reright.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But did you stand out in the early Mayfield because you had been at HP andconsequently knew a) about high tech, and b) about working at and managinga Silicon Valley company. Did that distinguish you in any way? Myers: I don’t know! [laughing] Beats me. It was just such a different time then. Ididn’t become a partner till the second fund. Back then, it was very much thetwo of them, and I was the associate. I wasn’t equal to them at all, in terms ofstature or my accomplishments or anything else. I remember talking toTommy in the mid-seventies saying, “You guys are always on all the boards. Iwant to go on a board. I want to get more involved.” “Oh, young man, yourtime will come. You’ll have more boards than you can deal with.” Whichhappened, but that took ten years. Now today it doesn’t, because there’s ademand, and it’s a whole different deal. But back then, it was kind of a club.The type of person’s changed. I never could get a job today. [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why do you say that? Myers: Well, because—because the demands are that the person step in, beproductive very quickly. You don’t have five years to see how it’s going.There are a whole bunch of dynamics. First of all, everybody’s paid more.You’re expected to get some ownership in the firm almost from the beginning.I didn’t get ownership until five, six years into it. And then I was loaned somemoney, and so forth.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And that was standard from firm to firm? Myers: No, they hadn’t hired young people. It was a brand new thing. I may havebeen one of the earlier associates. I don’t know who else had associates.Kleiner Perkins, all had principals, but no associates at the time. So I was kindof a new category. So today, the expectations are very high, so you hire people—typically they’repeople that have had ten years of industry, and they’ve done spectacularlywell: they’ve led this, they’ve led that, they’ve started this, they’ve startedthat. And they’ve done it in areas that you’re looking for. So if Mayfield needssomebody that’s in the Internet space or communications space, you look forthe ten-year entrepreneur that’s done all this stuff and they’ve been really successful. Then you hire them, you pay them a lot of money, you give them alot of ownership, and they’re expected to, day one, bring in deals, know howto assess deals, and help companies. So it’s a whole different model today.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How is it working? Because I’ve done a fair amount of interviewing in thebiotech industry, and I’ve been struck by how many of those people, as theyage, move into venture capital. Myers: From biotech?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. Myers: Coming from an operating background is kind of the way—it’s been that wayfor the last ten or fifteen years. That’s very important. You’ve got to know thetechnology, you’ve got to know the players. It’s just a given that they’ve gotto come out of the Genentechs or the technology companies around, otherwise[they] don’t know the players and [they] don’t know what [they]’re dealingwith. To be able to invest successfully, there is a learning curve. There are twoaspects to that: some people are just operating people. It’s a whole differentworld to go to work, make things happen, be tangible, grow this, it’s reallyyours. And those people don’t transition to venture capital very well, becausethey want to operate. And venture capital, you’re one or two steps removedfrom that, and you’re advising. You have a relationship. You have a bunch ofcompanies. You can’t spend the time, so some just don’t like it for that reason,or don’t make it as a venture capitalist. But the second thing is, if you brought someone over, what you hope is that asthey—you’ve got the whole partnership then working, so when you sit aroundthe table, and there are five or six or eight partners, you might be the newperson, but your naiveté on the investment side is sort of compensated by therest of the group. And so you might think this [proposal] is spectacular andit’s got to go through, or that you like an investment, but the other partnerssay, “But you haven’t thought of this, this, and this.” “Oh, really, well, wait—I never thought about those things.” And so that’s where it sort of comestogether. But it’s much more important today to have the fundamental knowledge ofwhat you’re investing in, which has become more complex, more fastmoving, et cetera. You’ve got to have that or it’s a non-starter.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Doesn’t that lead to a lot of specialization within firms?  Myers: Oh yes, definitely.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And is that yet another change from the way things started out? Myers: Oh yes. There were generalists, and generalists did fine for a long time, but inthe late eighties we hired Yogen Dalal out of Apple. He’d been at Apple andthen at one of their spin-offs, and he’s a software guy. So he was one of theearly designers of the Internet at Stanford with PARC [Palo Alto ResearchCenter] and all that. It was obvious—you had to have this expertise that knewthe networks, knew where the people were, knew where the deals were. Andso that’s continued to go on. Biotech is just as specialized. Highly specialized.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Let’s go back to your story about ownership. Myers: Well, when I joined, I didn’t understand the company. I was so naïve I didn’tknow about ownership. But they hadn’t hired young people. So Tommy andWally were the general partners, having most of what they call the carry in thefund.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Which is a given percentage? Myers: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And is it usually the same from firm to firm? Myers: It moves around, but back in those days, or even today—it used to be 20percent—so 20, 25, or 30 percent. And that meant that the general partnerswould get that percentage of the profits of the firm when liquidity occurred.Actually that’s a whole different story, but anyway, at some point in time, you[percent], and then Kleiner Perkins and we and others went to 25, and thenpercent.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It that a recent escalation? Myers: No. That all happened in the early nineties, 30 percent. But when I joined, thesenior two, Tommy and Wally, had that ownership for themselves. And Ithink they shared a little bit with Stanford or somebody else. After being therefor a few years I said, “Well, you know, I understand how this works, so can I 40have some ownership?” And that was an unknown concept. There was novehicle to do that. Now, all the legal work’s been figured out. It’s very easy to do. [Then] it waslike, “Oh God, I don’t know how we do this.” And so Tommy lent me$30,000 to invest as a limited partner. Now that was very nice of him, butthat’s really not the same thing. It’s a loan. I owe him $30,000; I was payinginterest on it, and if the fund didn’t do well, I still owe him $30,000! Whereas,if you’re a general partner, you have to put up some money, but basically itcomes almost for free. And if the fund goes away, you haven’t lost anymoney. I mean, it’s not quite that simple, but almost. And then that first fund wasn’t particularly successful. I think it just had abouta 4 or 5 percent return. This was in ‘76-’77—I wasn’t even sure I could payTommy back. I didn’t have any money. And then luckily, kind of at the lastminute, Storage Technology and a few companies did really well, and I paidhim back and made $10,000. So anyway, that whole concept of ownership was not well established. As webegan to add partners and others did, then we figured out the legal mechanismfor taking an existing carry and splitting it up in different ways. And today it’sjust expected. If you’re a pretty senior person joining a venture firm, you’reexpected to get ownership in the firm.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What about becoming a partner then and now? Myers: Same thing. It was just slower then. I became a partner in Mayfield II, a little,itty-bitty partner. But that was five, six years into it. And today a seniorperson would come in, probably, as a partner. You might have some otherjunior and some interns—not everybody in the firm is a partner today. Thereare twenty people out there, twenty-five, so not everyone is a partner, ofcourse, but they do—there are tiers and you figure it out. But at least there’s avehicle.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is it very much performance-based how you move into partnership? Myers: Well, if you’re senior in what you’ve done, accomplished a lot, then you cancome in as a partner right away.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right. But if you haven’t? Myers: If you haven’t, we’d start somebody with a fairly small partnership interest,and if they really did well—I mean, some of the companies were very successful, then—now they were getting only a small portion of those profitsbecause they had a small interest. So we also had—we would do a couple ofthings: occasionally within a fund we would change their ownership, whichwas fairly complicated to do, but we’d increase their respective share. Orcertainly in the next fund then, because their portfolio had done well, we’dincrease the ownership in the next fund.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. And presumably it can also move the other way. Myers: Down. Yes, that happened some.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Probably less common? Myers: Yes. It’s such a fuzzy business. Even measuring performance is—over timeyou can for sure, but who’s doing well, who made a critical hire, who helpedsomebody else. Maybe my partner was the key man on the deal, but I didsomething that it might not have survived without it. So what’s what, youknow? So we tried very hard to not dice it up and figure out exactly who didwhat and who was better. Inevitably we did that, because you just kind ofhave to recognize the differences.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, you spoke last time, and maybe congenial wasn’t quite the word youused, but I definitely got the impression from what you said that Mayfield wasa cooperative group, and there wasn’t a lot of backbiting until fairly recently. Myers: Right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You were looking after each other’s interests to a degree. Myers: Oh yes. No, it was a very congenial group, and then we prided ourselves onthat and it was one of these things where we felt that the group would begreater than the whole—or however you say that. [The whole is greater thanthe sum of the parts.]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And would you consider that to be a distinguishing characteristic of Mayfield? Myers: Yes. Now we lost a lot of that in the late nineties, but certainly during thatperiod that was definitely true. I think we had some partners who did just afew deals. I think I mentioned last time, we hired Bill Unger to do searchwork and headhunting for the company. So he made huge contributions, but he had ownership, but you couldn’t say that it was his deals, and so forth. Sowe liked that. Other firms had gone more on the superstar model, and onceagain, competitive pressure—we saw we had to go that way too. And there’sstill quite a bit of that where a person has a fiefdom—the John Doerr, BrookByers fiefdom. They did it their own way and got what they wanted. Weavoided that as long as we could, but then in the late nineties—that’s when ithappened.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And the discord, if that’s the word, that began to appear in the 1990s, wasthat, at least in part, a function of the greater competitiveness within the fielditself? Myers: Oh yes, I think so. Absolutely right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And more so than just the mix of personalities? Myers: Well, the personality mix didn’t change much until the late nineties. So, Idon’t know what the answer is exactly. Say it again? I’m kind of lost.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I was wondering how much of it was circumstance, the fact that ventureinvestment had become more competitive, consequently the individuals withinit were forced to be more competitive. Or was it just that you happened tohave a certain set of individuals at Mayfield who were more aggressive thanthe group before. Myers: It’s a little of each. Clearly it became more competitive. I’m thinking of one ortwo people that we hired that were really good, and they did really, reallywell. And then they stood up and said, “Hey, look what I did! I made thisenormous contribution, so I really want a lot more ownership. I don’t want tojust go by the old measures, I want a lot more.” And that began to be a problem. And then we started measuring everybodymore carefully. Oh okay, well, this person hasn’t done anything useful orhasn’t made any money for five years, so is that person no longer useful?Should their ownership be reduced? What do you do with it? You get intovery complicated issues, and that went against the culture that wedeveloped—Hey, let’s all work for the common good.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What turned it around? Myers: Oh, it didn’t really get turned around. I think we went to the competitiveculture. I left Mayfield not because of that, but that’s kind of where it was going. Mayfield had some hard times, because they’ve had some personalitieshere that were really conflicts and difficult to deal with and that, franklyhaven’t—well, they’re sorted out now, but it took ten years to sort out.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was your departure premised largely on that? Myers: Oh no, not at all. No, I was just ready to leave. I wanted to leave, that was it.I’m out of here. I think, in hindsight, I left too fast. Maybe if I’d stayedanother four or five years or part-time and all that, I could have been morehelpful in smoothing this transition or figuring out some of these things. Butthe leadership changed, I zapped out, and then there was all these marketpressures. The stock market was going crazy, the dot-com boom and all this,and it became very complicated. [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Would you talk about the process behind taking a company public? Myers: Well, today there’s no relationship to then, so I guess my frame of referencewas eighties and nineties, because after the dot-com boom the investmentbanks collapsed or reduced, and there were very few IPOs for four or fiveyears. There are a few more recently, but now the regulations on going publicare so complicated that many companies are being acquired. And then wehave the current financial mess. So I can’t really speak to today, except thatthey almost don’t go public.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, well speak about back in time. Myers: Well, the ultimate goal in those days was to go public. Being acquired wasokay, but you didn’t get as good a return. That’s shifted now, today. Butanyway, then, to go public, you just had a huge responsibility, because thecompany had to perform, and if you didn’t, then the Milberg Weiss group andother lawyers were out there to sue you. And so there was just a lot of scrutiny as a public company. So we were verycareful, as I think most people, until the boom of 2000 where everything wasgoing public. We were very careful that we were ready; we had a completemanagement team, the holes were filled, the company was doing well, all thenumbers were lining up, there was a backlog. We see where we’re going—allthe characteristics were lining up. So that was the main thing: is yourcompany really ready? Do you have a real business here?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And does that mean profits and product?  Myers: It may not quite mean profits, but they’re around the corner or they’re nextyear. It clearly means that you have product and you have real customers thatare buying, and buying increasing amounts. Your revenues are doubling everyyear or some such thing, so you’re really growing. And you may or may nothave profits—and that profit criteria would come and go. In boom cycles itwould go and in down cycles it would come back, kind of thing. And then in2000 everything went away—didn’t have to have revenues, didn’t have tohave anything—just go public. But nevertheless, in those earlier times, we really wanted a quality companythat we thought could be there for the long term, and that includes a goodboard of directors. And then after that you go to the investment bankers, andthere’s a whole process that I didn’t personally do, but the more you’reinvolved—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But somebody at Mayfield did? Myers: No, the banker work—we had relationships. We knew the bankers, the FrankQuattrones and Eff Martins and all the rest. So we might start it and say, “Eff,I’ve got a company I’ve been working with and I think you really ought totake a look at it.” “Okay.” They’d go down and talk, and the company wouldput on their show, would talk about it, and we’d begin to see if they wereinterested. Once again, it was part of the network the venture capitalists wouldbring to bear, because sometimes the company wouldn’t know these people.So we’d have those relationships and bring them to the company.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do investment banks tend to be more heavily into one technology, oneindustry than another? Or are they just simply looking for what they feel is agood business? Myers: Pretty much good business and can they make money. They make all theirmoney when they go public, but then they—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because they take—do they call it a carry? Myers: Yes, they take a percentage of the sales. So if they go to raise $100 milliondollars, I forgot what it is, they take 4 or 5, 6 percent as their commission fordoing the deal. So that’s where all the money was made for them. But then, inthose days, when they went public, they did have to support it, which meantthat they had to have an analyst, analyst reports, and educate the public, andoften there’d be a core group that would buy the securities in the beginning.But then you had to spread out the ownership, and they would help do that in the old days. And that all fell apart, but that’s the way it used to be. Anyway,there was a whole process that they had to go through.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What happened when it fell apart? Myers: You mean when the dot-com boom fell apart?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. All that due diligence, if you can call it that, went out the window? Wereinvestment banks as guilty as the entrepreneurs? Myers: Oh yes, oh absolutely. Well, it’s just like the mortgage cycle. In a way, whenit’s happening you don’t see it or you are not so aware. But the public was soanxious to buy these technology shares that everybody that went public wouldgo up like double or triple the next day, and that was incredible—it’s foundmoney. And so once that started, it was like a gold rush. It was like, “Oh my God!That’s really cool.” And so more and more people wanted to play that game.So it sort of starts with a very small group, but then others want to get—andso anyway, there’s a group spread. Finally, in the boom times, you had all thepublic through retail brokers, all wanting to participate in these huge stockgains and make their money and flip it and turn it out. And then they would dothat, but it went on for a long time. So there were more of them and more ofthem. After a while you say, “Wow. This is the way it’s going to be! This isreally great and look at all the money we’re all making.” And that’s a boom.That’s how these bubbles are created. And all of a sudden someone would say, “Hey, the emperor has no clothes.There’s nothing here.” And then companies weren’t performing. They’d saythey have some new technology, a new whiz-bang; they’d go public. All of asudden it wasn’t there, or it would be a year before it was there. So it just gotway, way overpriced, like a hundred times, two hundred times.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Genentech must have been in the first Mayfield fund, right? Myers: That was actually the second fund.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Kleiner Perkins was the original investor, but I thought that Mayfield came inin the second round, and I thought it was 1977. Myers: I think it was ’77-‘78. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you have anything to say about that investment? Here you had a companywith an entirely new technology, no products, no profits. It must have been aterribly speculative and risky thing. Myers: I knew Bob Swanson. We were venture capitalists. He was at Citibank. Weplayed tennis, and all that. And then he left and he started working on thisproject, I think it was at MIT.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, he went, of course, to Kleiner Perkins. It was Kleiner and Perkins inthose days. Myers: Right. He went there. And so that’s how that relationship started. I don’tremember the story all that well, but when Bob had the idea of the DNA andthen—and so he did start that with Kleiner Perkins. To seed something in youroffices and then do that was pretty unusual.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because you knew him, were you the connection with Mayfield? In otherwords, a quicker way of saying it is why did Mayfield get involved withGenentech? Myers: I don’t remember how exactly. Tommy Davis had more of a relationship withthe company, and he introduced Corning to it. Corning Glass, which was acritical introduction; Corning put in a lot of money, went on the board, andreally helped them in those early days. We never went on the board. And soTommy worked on that more than I did.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, Corning was later. Corning was the early eighties. Myers: Oh, I thought it was earlier. I don’t remember exactly.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Of course, that was a tremendously successful investment achievement. Myers: And it really has been one of those companies built to last, unlike most. Mostventure companies are gone. They get acquired or they just pfft, go away.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you credit Bob Swanson for that? Myers: Yes, Bob was really good. Bob was a great guy. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you keep in touch with him over time? Myers: Yes. We were friends, just friends over time.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you talking back and forth in the days when he was trying to make uphis mind whether to go with recombinant DNA or not? Myers: No.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you have anything more to say about the relationship between venturecapital and universities? How important is academia in the whole equation ofventure capital investment? Myers: Well, it’s very important today. It’s evolved. At the beginning it wasn’t veryimportant, because what comes out of academia usually is a long ways frombeing able to commercialize it. So in the seventies and a good part of theeighties, it was interesting and you’d go look. You’d go over to SRI [StanfordResearch Institute], same thing, and you’d look at what they had and [go],“Oh that’s interesting.” But we don’t have anybody to run it and [get] thistechnology even to a prototype stage. And so, da, da, da, you didn’t havemuch interest. It got more competitive in the mid-eighties, and I think that then that all beganto change. So two of the Mayfield [investments]—Silicon Graphics and MIPSboth came out of Stanford. Now at the same time, Stanford was doing thingsthat were more commercially applicable, unlike a lot of university research.That probably goes back to Terman and relationships in the Valley, so that theSilicon Graphics terminal concept was a real-life thing that people could useand work on, so it wasn’t just research. And that allowed [them] to form thebasis for pulling that out, and MIPS the same thing. So it evolved. And we backed other things out of Stanford. We backed aprojection system that went nowhere. It wasn’t ready.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: A projection of what? Myers: For digital theater projections. It’s like these gadgets, but much earlier, thatwe thought would be interesting. So I think it’s clear today that universitiesare very important. They’re doing some of the, in fact, some of the researchleft in the country are being done at universities, so— <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And university administrations are much more proactive, are they not, informing relationships with industry? Myers: Oh yes. Well, and they’ve got their licensing act together, which no one hadtogether [earlier]. For years, Stanford got nothing out of all this technologycoming out, which was not right somehow.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And UC, my understanding is, was even behind Stanford. Myers: Oh yes. Well, they all were. It took a long time to figure this out. I don’t evenknow how they do it today, but they’re aggressive. [laughs]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] They get their money, that’s for sure! Myers: This is our stuff. We’re paying for it. We want part of it. As they should have.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What do you consider to be your greatest strength? Myers: Hmm. I don’t like these things. [chuckling] I don’t know what my strength is!I guess at Mayfield, I thought my contribution was mostly the team, andbuilding a team, keeping the team working together, keeping a culture thatwas productive. I thought I was an okay venture capitalist, but I thought as amanager of a team—that was my greater strength.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And you liked that best? Myers: Yes, I did. I liked it a lot. I liked the company thing, too. But I spent a fairamount of my time as the managing partner, trying to make that part work too.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why did venture capital originate in this country, and why has it been mostsuccessful in this country? Myers: Well, it really is Silicon Valley. All the rest—well, or in Boston. I don’t knowwhat the numbers are now, but for a long, long time, what happened in SiliconValley eclipsed everything else in the country by a long ways. And I think itwas the confluence of these things—it goes back to Dean Terman, it goesback to Stanford, it goes back to a West Coast approach to life versus the restof the world. It’s the Wild West—sure we can do it—not the Wild Westanalogy exactly, but it’s “Sure we can do it.” It’s a big world; it’s a positive outlook. It’s like—“I don’t really care what your background is—so youfailed at three companies. If you can do this, you’re on, and I’ll give you ashot at it.” Still today you can’t do it on the East Coast much. Still today—it’slike—[imitating a condescending person] “Well, you didn’t work here. Yourresume doesn’t look very good. Why should we hire you?” It’s a wholedifferent attitude.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And that still holds on in the east? Even with the West Coast as a model? Myers: Oh absolutely. You can’t over generalize on these things, but I have somefriends that are in the investment business. They don’t want to work on theEast Coast. It’s just too snooty and what kind of racquetball court do youbelong to, and which club, and what’s your resume—it’s all this sort ofgobbledygoop. Out here, it’s like—“Take off your tie. Let’s get to work and get somethingdone.” So it’s a whole different approach to life and attitude and, “Let’s trysomething new. Let’s try alternative medicine.” Let’s do this, let’s do that. Soit’s that attitude of: We can build something. A lot of the entrepreneurs, you look at their backgrounds—Nolan Bushnell—and many others have no apparent background for doing what they’re doing.[chuckling] In fact, somebody [may] wonder: How did we ever get here? Howdid we back them? I don’t [have] all the words for it. I haven’t thought aboutit for a while. You throw in a kind of attitude, almost a culture of, Let’s just do it. We canget things done. And the technology and the Stanford and smart people. So itwas here and then it went to L.A. and Boston a little bit. The rest of thecountry tried to do it. Not very successfully at all, and now people are tryingto do it all over the world. Obviously, it must work in some ways, but I thinkit’s also because of the interconnected flat world and all the rest of that stuffthat you can do these things today. I haven’t thought about how to integrate what’s happening in China, India,and all these other things. They’re very entrepreneur[ial] cultures. When yougo visit, you’re really impressed by it. But they didn’t have the universitybackground, they’ve got a technology background and all that stuff.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, the things that you’ve been talking about I think you could put under theculture umbrella. What about some of the more boring things, like taxstructure, that may have been a boon to getting new enterprises off theground? 50 Myers: You know, it probably did, but back when this all started, we had our 70percent tax structure, and capital gains got some break, but it wasn’t as big ofa break. Clearly taxes accelerated it, when they made the big differentiation,the capital gains differentiation, and then we and others found a way to set upthese partnerships. So it’s two pieces—it’s the huge tax benefits, setting uppartnerships so that the general partners could have the ownership position Italked about and have their profits taxed as capital gains. That was a very,very tricky thing in the early seventies. That was kind of a legal breakthroughhow to do that. But that was just for that side. On the entrepreneurial side, I don’t really know the history, but the fact thatthe stock options—same thing—you get all that appreciation of the optionsand taxed as capital gains—I don’t quite when that came in. The stock optionwas a phenomenal incentive, phenomenal incentive. So yes, it played a bigrole, probably the biggest one.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: In the areas of the world, China and India, et cetera, that are beginning todevelop venture capital, have they introduced tax laws that are also— Myers: Good question. I have no idea. [chuckling] I will ask that. That’d be veryinteresting to know.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Can you say anything about how venture capital has affected, impacted theU.S. economy? Is that just too general a question? Myers: It’s too general. It’s made an enormous impact, it created thousands of jobs.It’s been the best thing ever! [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Touché! Myers: Lots of fantastic companies have come out of that, a lot of really qualitycompanies and a lot of jobs. They still collect, I’m sure, these numbers forCongress and other people. I’m not up to date on the meaning of it all.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You’ve certainly done a good job of commenting on how venture capital haschanged during your career. But have we left anything out? Is there more thatyou would like to say about the changes? Myers: I don’t think so. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You kindly this morning sent me the names of a handful of companies that wemight discuss. So I will just simply go through your list, which started withSimplex Systems. Why that investment, and is there anything particular thatyou’d like to bring out about it? Myers: Well, that was an example of an investment of two entrepreneurs, twotechnical people out of the University of Illinois with a CAD, computer-aideddesign system or technology. It really came to us through Richard Newton,who was the Berkeley person, and that was his specialty area, so he knewabout their technology and how they were doing it, thought this wasimportant. I thought they were purchased in the mid-nineties, anyway, ’95-’96.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh that late? Myers: Yes, a little later. And I guess I thought of that only because it was sort ofwhat we were doing then. We had some technologists that were very good,didn’t know how to run a company. We agreed to give them money on theproviso that we’d bring in a CEO at the right time. We funded them for abouta year or so, and Rich was on the board, and I went on the board and in fact, afew other people. But as the technology began to evolve, we needed a CEO.And then what so often happens is the key guy didn’t want to—said, “No. Idon’t want to do that. I want to be CEO now. I’m here. I don’t want to dilutemy stock—this and that. I mentioned it because I felt good about it in that I had a good enoughrelationship with Rez Salek to convince him to open the door, by getting toknow him and spending time and all that, allowing us to go look forsomebody. We found a woman named Penny Herscher to come in and run it,who was a fantastic person and she built the company and sold it to—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Cadence? Myers: Cadence. But I guess I just think of that because that’s where, I think, theventure capitalists play a really important role. If they’d been left to their owndevices, it would have been a disaster. But we got the door opened and gottheir confidence and Rez later thanked me. He said, “God, thanks for doingthat.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, then there was another CADcompany—  Myers: Cadnetix.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Any connection there? Myers: No, none at all. That was the early eighties, Cadnetix.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was CAD a new thing then? Myers: No. CAD’s been around. Doing a chip layout and board layout and all that.It’s been around for a long time, but it’s evolved, and it’s in itself critical tounderlying technology to all of this stuff, because no longer can mortal humanbeings figure this stuff out. So the computer programs that do this were led alot by Richard; that was his specialty at Berkeley. And Berkeley is a center, itstill remains a center for the cutting-edge technology of getting all this stuffon a chip so it all works. So that was one of his specialty areas. But we didn’tknow Richard then.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So not necessarily just CAD on chips, but general systems on chips. Myers: Well, it’s getting all the components of a semiconductor chip to all go in theright places and interact and work together. So you might have a littlethingamajigger, and it’d have a few million parts on it. So how do you get allthose interconnected and working and multi-layer? It’s very, very complex.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And that was what Newton was— Myers: That was his specialty. In fact, his PhD students—he had design teams; he hadrelationships with major companies all around that subject. He was also on theboard of Synopsys and a number of the companies in the Valley doing this. Sohe was the kind of guy we wanted to have part of us because he knew all thisstuff. And so Simplex was just one example of a technology company hebrought to us for that.Cadnetix was totally different. That was in Boulder, Colorado, and we had anaffiliate we worked with in Boulder. Bruce [M.] Holland, the CEO of thatcompany. So our affiliate found Bruce; we invested with Bruce, and then thatwas sort of a different deal. And then, actually, Bruce started anothercompany called SpectraLink which we also, in fact, invested in.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that unusual for you to have investments out of the state?  Myers: Well, not over time. Up until the mid-eighties, we definitely stayed inCalifornia.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that was a deliberate decision? Myers: Yes. We didn’t want to travel and, once again, when you’ve got a hands-on,go to board meetings, get to know the people, if they’re far away, you can’t doit. Once again—lots of competition [and] it changed. So there was a lothappening in Boulder, and so we had an affiliate there which was our first stepin that direction. So another partnership that we helped them raise money andI was on the advisory board. This was the Hill Partnership, and so they wereinvesting in their local area. I’d go there once a month and we’d look ateverything they were looking at. They found a number of things. This wasone—Cadnetix, that they had a local relationship—they knew the entrepreneurand then we got involved on the board.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: If you have an affiliate in the picture, I would assume that that cuts down onthe profit that Mayfield might have made. Myers: Yes, but for an early stage, there was room for everybody. Well, there wasor $4 million funds. They’d put up $200,000 or $300,000, and back then wewere putting up $0.5 million or so. Burt McMurtry came into that. I don’tknow quite how he came in, but he was part of that. So anyway, you’re right,but otherwise we wouldn’t be there.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is Mayfield now all over the show? Myers: Oh yes, they evolved. So then we started some biotech companies in the EastCoast, and certainly down in southern California, and now we’re in Indiana.Yes, so everywhere.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: For a company that, at least in the early days, was emphasizing personalrelations—that must have changed. Myers: Oh, it did. It’s not as good. That’s why we resisted for so long, because—well,first of all, it’s impossible to do a pure startup, some really early-stagetechnologies, you just can’t do that at that distance.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because it takes so much hands-on?  Myers: It’s hands-on, you’re there a lot, you’re seeing them a few times a week andeverything else, and you’re helping them build the team. And then whenthey’re far away, you just can’t do those things. So we evolved that by justworking with others. So the biotech team here, led by Grant Heidrich and afew others, they had relationships in the Boston area. So a Boston venturecapitalist would maybe find the deal and get something going, and then wewould come along with them. We’d still go on the board, but they wouldspend more local time than we were able to spend. That was true all over. Wedid this Hill Partnership in Boulder because they were there all the time. Imean, the lion’s share. But it just gets harder and harder. They’re still doing it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Another one is SpectraLink? Myers: Well, that came out of Cadnetix, so that was Bruce Holland, the sameentrepreneur in both cases. SpectraLink was making essentially a wirelesstelephone system, commercial grade.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Way back? Myers: No, this is ’93, I think. He did this after Cadnetix. It was the early nineties thatBruce started this company, and then it actually did go public and then gotmerged a few years ago. But that’s another company where we got to knowBruce Holland. He was starting a new company and we had a goodrelationship, so he said, “I’m starting a new company. Let’s get going.” Here’sa proven entrepreneur, which is really easy, because we knew him, we likedhim a lot, he built good teams. So anyway, that was just all I wanted with that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Good illustration of the importance of personal relationships and experience.How do you pronounce M-I-P-S [spells]. Myers: MIPS. MIPS Computer Systems.Well, what was interesting about that one issimply, as I mentioned earlier, that was John Hennesy and group spinning outof Stanford to do that. That was also one of the earlier ones where weincubated them at our offices, so they were in our offices for six months ormore developing their business plan. And then two of us, Grant Heidrich andmyself, both went on the board. We went and found a president—that initialfounding group from the beginning knew they wouldn’t be president, so wehelped them find Bob [Robert C.] Miller, the president. So it was a companythat was big ownership; we put a lot of time into the same kinds of things—building a team, working on strategy, helping do fundraising rounds, that sortof thing. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: The last one on your list is Latitude Communications. Myers: That company was sold to Cisco [Systems, Inc.] a few years ago. They weremaking a telephone conferencing system. It goes way back. It’s a group wehad been following; I was on the board. I don’t know what to say about it. Idon’t know what to draw out. These were all fairly early stage; we had largeownership positions. You work with the team, you help to build people. Youcritique it. One thing I haven’t mentioned much, but another thing you try todo is help them introduce new customers. [We] had the credibility they oftendon’t have, and promote their product and so forth.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And how do you do that? Myers: Well, when we know customers, we have relationships, so if we knewsomebody at Cisco or some other company—it’s a fledgling startup. You lookfor help from every direction. And so if we have a relationship with a largercompany, or Hewlett-Packard, then we’ll sort of make the connection, “Youought to consider these guys,” So as a venture capitalist, you just try to help inevery way you can in building the company.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What about a failure or two? Maybe with some lessons to learn from that. Myers: I didn’t go over the list thinking about failures. Well, there’s one East Baycompany—I also don’t like to talk about it, because the people are stillaround.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You don’t have to name names. Myers: The East Bay company with a computer product for companies. The problemwas the CEO, who didn’t hire very well, was stubborn, and we couldn’t gethim out. He was an articulate guy, he kept raising money somehow, but hewasn’t performing.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You mean by performing he wasn’t making money? Myers: Wasn’t making his plans, where he’d said we’d sell this many systems. It wasa computer printing product—and we’d sell this many systems, and hewouldn’t do that; he’d sell one instead of five and then have an excuse for it.And then the next quarter and the next quarter. So when that begins to happen,Okay, what’s wrong here? And it’s usually some part of the team isn’t right. And the CEO was a pretty good guy, but he just didn’t hire well, and so hedidn’t have good sales people, didn’t have good marketing people, and theycouldn’t execute on the plan. And so after several attempts at him trying to—not hiring well, then you say, “Well, okay, then you’re the problem, becausewe’ve got to get these people in here.” And then he fought not to get pushedout, and so this was actually very exciting. It doesn’t happen very often whereyou have a shareholder vote to actually push a guy out. That’s really unusual.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Which Mayfield had to orchestrate? Myers: Yes, exactly right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How do you go about doing that? Myers: Well, there are not so many shares—it’s not a public company, so you knowwho all the shareholders [are]. But you’ve got to go to other venturecapitalists. And in this case, there were a lot of individuals that had stock fromearlier days before we got involved, and they sided with management. We hadthe major investors siding with us. You actually get into a fight where peopleare organizing votes and a shareholder meeting, and you’re going to vote forthis or vote for that. We brought in another guy over other people’s objectionsand installed him, and he didn’t do a very good job, and so now we had mudon our face. When that happens it’s like you’re spending twenty-four hours a day workingon one mess. It probably won’t come out very well in the end, so it’s a—Ishouldn’t say it’s a complete waste of time, but usually when it gets into amess like that, you would have been better off to walk away at the beginning.But you can’t walk away. You’re the lead investor, there are other investorsinvesting with you, so you can’t just say, “I’m tired of this. I want out ofhere.” You’ve got to work it through and try to make the best of it, but sell it ifit goes anywhere.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: If you could organize all the venture capitalists to get out—what would thatbig process be? They’ve invested their people’s money—how do you get outof a deal that’s going bad? Myers: You don’t get out of it. As I said, sometimes you just feel like you’d like towalk away, get off the board, not put all the time into it because that’s justwasted time. But you can’t do that, because at the beginning you think youcan help or fix it, or if we did this or did that. So you go down that path. Andthen the investors don’t always agree; some agree, some don’t.  And so now you need to raise some money, because usually this happensabout the time they’re running out of money. So we want to raise money—well, some investors want to put up money and some don’t. So now what doyou do? You make it more and more attractive, and so you say, “All right. Forthose that put up money, you get a larger and larger ownership. If you don’tput up money, it’s being more and more punitive. There are all kinds ofmechanisms people figured out to make it this way. But then, the ones thatdon’t want to put up money, put up a fight—“Oh, you aren’t being fair.” Andmaybe they have a lawsuit or do something else because they haven’t beentreated properly. And it just turns into a nightmare of gobbledygoop and mess.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Situations like that I hope are not too common. Myers: No, they’re not too common.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did they keep you awake at night? Myers: Oh yes, exactly, because you’re the lead person and you’re trying to juggle allthese things and trying to make something of it. That’s why you’re doing allthis. And so yes, it just totally consumes you for weeks while you’re doingthis, and it usually doesn’t go anywhere in the end.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And is that company still stammering along? Myers: No, the CEO is stammering along. He’s actually started another company andsome people are, “Maybe he’s doing better this time around.” I haven’tfollowed him much. We didn’t part the best of friends.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [laughing] I can well imagine! Myers: The more typical thing, though, is that you’ll sell a company. You’ll say,“You know, the market isn’t as big, the product doesn’t work as well as wethought, so the opportunity just isn’t what it was here.” So you’re sitting downwith the CEO [saying]— As a lead investor, part of your job is to raisemoney, so [you say], “I don’t think we can raise the money. I don’t thinkthere’s the interest. We don’t have a good enough story. So let’s try to sell it.”And that’s another whole process where often a venture capitalist is prettyhelpful in the sales process. Maybe the venture capitalist would know peopleto go to, or you hire an investment bank that does the more formal research.  They used to say—well, I don’t know if it’s still true or not—but you’d maketen investments and might only have one failure. Then you’d have two orthree that were maybe sold and made a little money. Then you had the one ortwo that made all the money. In between you might have the living dead. Thecompanies that go on for ten, fifteen years. They were lucky enough to get toself-sustaining capital so they didn’t have to raise more money, but they didn’treally grow, never went public. So really it’s only two or three companies outof ten that really do all the work.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: People accept that that’s just what happens. Myers: Yes, exactly right. You’d like to change the odds, but it just doesn’t work thatway usually.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, you said something just now that reminded me of a statement you madeearlier, that the IPO, rather than an acquisition, is the way to go as far as theventure capitalist is concerned, because of making more money. Could youexplain that? Myers: Well, it’s a function of the times. So in the eighties and nineties, particularlythe nineties, the public market was paying very high prices, and thetechnology companies weren’t paying when they acquired companies. Theyjust wouldn’t pay as high a price, for whatever reason. Today, with no publicmarket, you can’t do that, and so the main exit strategy is through acquisition.I’m told that companies are paying pretty high prices. It’s so competitivetoday, the time-to-market window is so short, that if they need a technology—they don’t have time to develop it themselves, they need to acquire it, and it’sworth it to pay a high price. So that’s the main exit strategy today. So it sort ofdepends on where the markets are which way works better, but traditionallypublic has been the better way.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It seems a puzzle to me to say that time to market is shorter. I would think thatwould be very contingent on the technology that you’re talking about. Myers: Yes, but all the cycles are just going faster.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Everything is revved up. Myers: Everything is revved up. Well, everything is more competitive, not on aventure capital, but on a technology market. I have to sort of think—I’m outof the current loop. Our early premise I said was unique technologies. Only afew people in the world knew how to do it, and if you made this product work, you wouldn’t have competition for a year or two or three. And today that justdoesn’t happen. I don’t know of anything that has those conditions. So youhave competition in six months or three months, and so you’ve got to get thatproduct on the market. You’ve got to execute. You’ve got to be successful atit. And that’s true for the big companies and small companies across theboard.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is biotech perhaps an exception? Considering all the stages that a potentialproduct has to go through—clinical trials, the FDA, and all of that—doesventure capital just put biotech in a slightly different category? Myers: Yes. It’s just different dynamics. We had three people here in biotech. Iwasn’t involved with much biotech at all. So all my comments are electroniccomments, because biotech is a different world.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That’s fair. Myers: But you’re right. It takes an enormous amount of capital, far more. Thetechnology risks are far, far greater. They take longer to resolve, hugeamounts of capital. I was just talking to a biotech friend, and he’s been doingbiotech for fifteen years and he said, “I’ve had it. It just takes too long.” He’sdoing devices now, which are more akin to electronics. They have some FDAapprovals, but they don’t have all the human stuff involved in it.He likes devices because they’re more tangible. Now traditionally theyhaven’t gotten as good a multiple, as good a price on devices. Maybe that’schanged today. I don’t really know. And then the pharmaceutical companieshave no research going on, I’m told. So everybody is just looking to be boughtby a pharma company for a new product or some new technology. Grant Heidrich led that group here, and Grant did a really, really good job. Hedidn’t join us until I think ’82, but in a biotech way, he would be certainly oneof the earliest people around. Genentech was earlier. But as a venturecapitalist, Grant was really good, and he got recognized as Mayfield havingone of the best biotech track records of anybody up until at least the latenineties, including Kleiner Perkins, in terms of their number of companies andquality. Grant would be a great historian on that, and he still remains prettyactive in a number of companies.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I definitely want to talk to him. Myers: He would be good to cover that side. 60<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, is that enough on venture capital? Myers: [laughter] Sure!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: We’re running out of time, and I don’t want to leave out this communitywork. To make sure that we get it in, start with the Entrepreneurs Foundation? Myers: Okay.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How did the idea came to you, and how did you set up the foundation, andwere you using a model of some kind? Myers: OWell, this was early ’98, and I had announced to Mayfield that I was goingto transition out but anticipated spending three-quarters time or something forthe next few years. But I also, as I said earlier, was tired of the business, readyto leave, and falling asleep in meetings. So my very simple thought was, itseemed to me, we were having very successful IPOs. So the entrepreneurs andventure capitalists wake up the next morning, and they’d made millions ofdollars. It’s magic. [laughter] So why can’t that magic work for thecommunity? So I started off with just the simple thought that what if some small piece oftheir stock in these IPOs or these companies were given to the community,and then they benefit? And that’s when I talked to Peter [deCourcy] Hero whowas running Silicon Valley Community Foundation and Sterling Speirn whowas running the Peninsula Community Foundation, a number of friends. Itwas Kirk [O.] Hanson, another friend, who said, “Well, that’s important.Money’s always important, but the real thing is we’ve got to change theculture. If you don’t change the culture of the Valley, nothing’s going to reallychange.” And at that time there was nothing happening. Hewlett-Packard and a fewcompanies contributed to the Valley, but not much activity. And even thosepeople making money, at least in my observation it was, [they’d] start a newcompany, and they would get around to the community later. So anyway, I spent a year working on this idea and evolving it. The verysimple concept is that we’d take a small amount of stock in a company. Also,we have a program to change the culture and incorporate the community aspart of the culture of the company. And so both together would make both astronger company and a stronger community.  I worked on that here, and Mayfield was very nice. I was doing almost noMayfield work, but I had an office and a secretary and a nice place to look at.I worked on that here for a long time. We hired our first executive director,Patty Burness, and Mayfield paid for that. I think that’s about the time thatMayfield set up a foundation. Actually I should come back to that. And soPatty and I began to work on this, and it was a pretty new idea. A lot ofcompanies didn’t think this was the right thing to do. So we started off withMayfield companies, and with the six Mayfield companies it was kind of abeta test site to see if I could sell this thing. And we got them going on it. Andthat’s sort of how it got started. But the fundamental thing was that this whole community—venturecapitalists, entrepreneurs in large companies, were doing nothing for the localcommunity at all, almost nothing. They might be supporting their kids’schools, but even kids’ schools— I went to help kids’ schools raise money,and people that I knew that had a lot said, “Well, why should I give money tothe school? They charge tuition. What else is there?” So it was unlike the EastCoast, which is very oriented toward supporting schools, these entrepreneursout here had no clue, and it wasn’t part of their culture; it wasn’t part of theirupbringing apparently. It was like, “What’s this?”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you think some of your motivation is because you had grown up outsidethe Bay Area, and you saw that businesses had more community spirit? Myers: Well, I saw it peripherally. I grew up in St. Louis. My family was a middleincome family, but we made church contributions. So no, I didn’t grow upwith that environment. I don’t know why it is. It’s almost like I went intoventure capital, and I don’t quite know why. I don’t know quite why I did this,but as I got into it I felt completely compelled to do it. Just like this issomething that has to happen. I started the foundation as a nonprofit. Mayfieldput the initial capital in it. We had offices downstairs, but I worked harderduring that three years than I’ve ever worked in my life. Much harder.Obviously more like an entrepreneur. I’ve always felt the venture capitalistshad it easy. Entrepreneurs do all the hard work, and venture capitalists takecredit for it sometimes. Anyway, so that was how it got started.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How were you working hard? Did this mean going around and trying to sellyour idea to specific companies? Myers: Well, it took a surprisingly long time to get the idea refined, so you could talkabout it—and talk about it in a convincing way that people would say, “Ohyes, that really makes sense.” And it seems so simple today, and we’re havingour tenth anniversary on Wednesday. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, spell it out a little. As I understand it, you’re talking about companiesthat have not gone public yet and are offering a percentage of their privatestock. Myers: The idea started—it was just that—to take fairly early stage companies; wewere shooting for 1 percent of the stock, which turned out to be outrageouslytoo much. But we would get a ¼ percent or a ½ percent. It would come out ofthe employee stock option pool which, when it worked, was generally okaybecause the pool was large enough, or the board would refresh the pool tomake up for what little bit we took. So it didn’t impact employees. It wasn’t asif it came out of the employees’ side. So we’d take that, and the initial version was that that stock would all comeinside Entrepreneurs Foundation. We’d help with our community programsand the rest, and then when they went public and the stock became liquid, wewould use part of it to fund our operations. But then the majority of it we’dmake a grant back to the community, and so we’d support schools or othercommunity organizations.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: The foundation made the decision of who was supported? Myers: Exactly right. I don’t know how much detail you want. The thinking therewas, the companies were too busy; they didn’t want to bother with grantmaking and all that. So we would support the community by doing this, andthen later, obviously, or at the same time, we were helping the company todevelop volunteer programs and integrate with the community. We’d helpthem find an organization that was nearby that they could work with, maybethey’d like to volunteer with. They’d help them raise money, maybe go ontheir board. So we were doing the whole cultural thing along the way. Whenthey went public, then we had the stock. At one point we had almost $10 million of stock from all these IPOs, but itwas a flawed strategy. First of all, the companies—they saw that as theirstock. [chuckling]. It’s like, “Why do we give it to you?” And so prettyquickly we changed to fifty-fifty. So 50 percent of what you give us—yougive us the whole thing, but when you go public, 50 percent will be put into adonor-advised fund with a community foundation so you can then direct thatmoney where you want. The other 50 percent will support our operations. Andthat flew pretty well for a while. But even then we were doing grant making, it turns out, obviously inhindsight, but grant making in doing our cultural thing, our two differentbusinesses, totally. And there was a rationale that you could talk about, but theboard was confused, and some people liked the grant making; some people liked the change the culture and like—but what are we doing? So when themarket collapsed in 2000, a lot of our stock was somewhat illiquid—itbasically went away, so we were out of money. So we’d made some grants and that’s a whole different story, to a venturefund grant. We’d done some of that. But the market went down, the moneywent away, pffftt, let’s get rid of that. So we got rid of the grant makingtotally and have since focused on building the company part of it. And we stillwent, for many years, with a model of 50 percent. The story gets morecomplicated. When talking to pre-public companies, we’re up to about 180companies that have joined over the years.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All local? Myers: A hundred and eighty local companies, and we’ve probably returned, I don’tknow—$5 [million], $10 million back to the community from the stock fromthose companies. At the same time, places in other parts of the country and theworld thought this was a pretty good idea. So an Entrepreneurs Foundationwas started in Austin, Dallas, Atlanta, Boston, Denver, Seattle, Oregon, andIsrael. Now each of these were started using our concept, and at first we began tolicense them to use the name, and this and that, but we ran out of time and wedidn’t have any resources, to speak of. So they each have a slight variation onthe theme, but they’re pretty close. We’ve tried to be helpful, but as I said, wedidn’t have the resources. So we’re kind of the mother ship, but we haven’tdone much. There are over 700 companies that have joined an EntrepreneursFoundation; there’s $10 [million] or $15 million gone back to the community,and hundreds of thousands of employees have—I don’t know what thenumber is now—have participated in our volunteer programs.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That’s pretty impressive. Over what time period? Myers: Ten years ago. It started in January of ’98.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That’s fabulous. Myers: But then how it has evolved is that it continued to be too hard. My originaldream was that we’d reach a tipping point where people would say, “Youknow, this is such a great thing for everybody. It’s good for the company; it’sgood for the community. Everybody should be doing it. So the way we all dobusiness in Silicon Valley is to join the Entrepreneurs Foundation, and every lawyer, every venture capitalist, would just expect that of their company totake a sliver of stock and do these things. That’s where I wanted to get; we didn’t get there. It proved continually toohard to sell to the companies in several regards. Many CEOs liked it; I wouldsay most CEOs thought it was a really cool idea. But to get that stock they hadto go to the board of directors. Going to a board of directors is terrifying formost executives—I shouldn’t say terrifying—they have a lot of agenda itemsand things they want to get through the board, and so they are very carefulhow they manage their board. And getting stock for a fuzzy thing like thecommunity is like really low on the list. So what would happen is they would not make the agenda, “Oh, you know,we just had too many things. We didn’t get to do it. So next meeting, nextmeeting we can do it again.” Or an entrepreneur would bring it up and say,“This is something that we’d like to talk to you about and get a little sliver ofstock.” And there’d be some venture capitalist on the board that said, “This isstupid. We’re not going to do this.” Well, when someone says that on a lowpriority item, nobody’s going to fight for it. The CEO’s not going to go to bat. So for the period of time I was running all this, I knew a lot of the boardmembers. I’d call every board member; I’d go to the board meeting. You justkill yourself. I’d get everybody lined up behind this to say, “Okay, we’ll doit.” But then when I stopped running it, and we have a great person running itthat has been there for ten years, but she isn’t a venture capitalist that knowsall these people. She kind of does now, but nevertheless, she can’t go to aventure capitalist partner meeting and go to parties and say, “Brook—whydidn’t you do this? You’ve got to be in this thing. Tomorrow when you vote, Iwant you to back this thing!” And so we worked like crazy over the years to get more and more support.We’ve got a council of venture capitalists. There are about sixty venturecapitalists that have all signed up, helping us find other companies. Diane[Solinger] has done a great job of organizing volunteer groups. And we haveattorneys that back it; we have attorneys that put us in term sheets. We havedone all this stuff. But it’s still so hard. So we evolved just a few years ago to say on the stock thing, “We really don’tneed much stock. Let’s think about emulating the Google Foundation and theeBay Foundation. We actually will help you set up your foundation and we’lldo the volunteer work.” So at least on the stock, it didn’t look like they weregiving the stock to us. And that was helpful for a while, but it’s still so hard.We’re going to be announcing the night after tomorrow where we are. Whatwe have been experimenting with for the last year is that we’ve become,probably, the repository of corporate/community knowledge, better thananybody else in the world, probably. We are really good at it, the team. We have twenty ways you can do it; we know how to implement it; we know thelegal issues; we know all about how to do it. And so, what’s been happening is we’ve been involved in more and moremature companies, clearly ones that are pre-public, we try to go there and getthat stock when we can, but now we’re going to larger companies that arealready up and running. They don’t give us stock, they just pay a fee, but wework with their HR [Human Resources] groups. So in those companies theymight have a little bit going, or nothing, but they know that—they have moretime, they’re larger companies, the HR knows this, so they’re coming to usnow and saying, “How do we get this started? How do we get this kind ofprogram going? How do we do a school program?” Or, “How do we do paidvacation days off?” And so we now have these larger companies are startingto join us. We’ve put together a group, conferences of this group, and now we’re juststarting a new whole Web service where we’ll reach out all over the countryto hundreds of companies in terms of sharing what we know about corporate/community arrangements, how to make it work. So it’s evolving. I think in some respects it didn’t get as far as I would haveliked, but it’s done pretty darn well. And I think, appropriately, we’re movinginto a new phase I think actually will be pretty neat.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: A hundred and eighty companies! I think that speaks for itself. [chuckling] Myers: Yes, that’s pretty good, yes, that’s pretty good.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Shall we then talk about the Mayfield Foundation? Which you think wasfounded around the same time? Myers: Around the same time. This was also a time frame with all the companiesgoing public—you’ve probably read about this. If you were friends with abroker at a Robertson Stephens or one of the hot investment banks, the brokerwould get an allocation of this hot IPO stock. And so they’d say to you, “Doyou want 100 shares of this stock? It’s really hot!” And so, “Great, thanks.”And you’d buy the stock on the opening, it would double or triple, and you’dsell it an hour later or the next day. And you’d made three times your money. So as part of their marketing, they would go to venture capitalists and say,“Do you want this stock?” And some venture capitalists would put upthousands and tens of thousands and buy a lot of stock and then flip it the nextday or a couple of days later and they’d make $10,000, $100,000, $1 million dollars in a day or two! And then it got to be where you wouldn’t put up anymoney. It all happened so fast no money changed hands. Pretty neat! We thought that wasn’t really a good idea. So from the beginning we feltthat—it wasn’t dishonest, but it just wasn’t they way it’s supposed to be. Sowe would get these allocations of stock, like everybody else, particularly ifone of our companies— We had another variation: if one of your owncompanies is going public, or you’re on the board, then you’d be given a bigallocation for your firm to use in this way and make all this extra money. Andthat’s part of their marketing. So that’s when we set up a foundation. We said, “Well, we don’t want to playthat game.” So we’d take that stock; we’d put it in our foundation. And thenwhen it would go up we’d liquidate it in the foundation. So our foundationhad many millions of dollars in it from all this free stock we got, and thenwe’d use that. We began to do community programs. And so we had acommittee here and we’d make grants, and like anything, it was sort of hard toget it all going, but many years we made grants of $0.5 million or $1 million,the end of the year, to local community organizations. Then that foundation also started to fund Entrepreneurs Foundation in termsof hiring our first executive director. We had to rent more office space and wehired another person. In fact, Diane Solinger, who runs it now was hired backthen. So anyway, the foundation was used to do that. I’m not aware, and itmight not be true, but I’m not aware of any other venture capitalists that didthat. But I thought it was pretty cool. And then we actually set up giving groups, where among the partners whowere then starting to do philanthropy in their own way. It’s always an issue—what do you support. Everybody’s busy; they don’t have time to go look forthings. So I started this thing saying, “Well, if Yogen [Dalal] or Kevin orsomebody else is involved with something, maybe we ought to just supportwhat they’re involved in,” kind of thing. So we set up monthly meetings. So ifone of the partners was involved in something, which meant on the board, thepartners would all come to the dinner, and the respective nonprofit wouldcome and make a pitch. The idea was everybody would pitch in—I forgotwhat—but they would walk away from the meeting with $100,000. And wedid that for many months. That was pretty cool. That wasn’t the foundation;that was personal money. But just—support each other’s programs. And reallycool. Our CFO at the time, George Pavlov, his wife had a baby at Stanford, endedup having a really unique kidney disease, and Stanford didn’t have a massspectrometer department to test for it. And it took almost a week to get the testdone. The baby almost died, and if they’d gotten the test, they could haveknown right away what the issue was. It was a very obscure thing, and therewas only one place in the U.S. or California. So George decided to help set up that department. So he raised, among us, the first 0.25 million dollars to getthe department going. And then the foundation I think—various thingshappened. Well now, it’s a full-fledged department, staffed, funded, atStanford, doing unique diseases that they never tested for before. And Georgestarted this whole thing, got it going, and the foundation started it. So anyway,I just thought that unique among venture capitalists for sure, were some of thethings we were doing at that time.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Impressive. Another thing, I read that you were chairman of Stanford’sVenture Investment Group. Myers: Was I? Oh I know—there were several of them. The Engineering School hada venture investment group—they got venture capitalists. I was chairman ofthe Stanford Business School one. There’s another one at the EngineeringSchool. The concept—brilliant concept on Stanford’s part—was, “Let’s get abunch of venture capitalists to all be on this little team, and so wheneverthey’re doing a deal, you can have Stanford’s money. So Stanford’sendowment can invest whatever you’ll let in—$0.25 million, $1 million,whatever you want. No questions asked. If you want the money, it’s there.”And it was brilliant. [chuckling] So they got the best venture capitalists in theValley, that cared about Stanford. So we’re raising $10 million, and we’vejust allocated $1 million for Stanford. They didn’t get it every time, but lots oftimes. Stanford made gajillions on that. That was in the boom time. Stanfordsold a lot of those stocks when they went public—it was just a brill[iant].<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: This is the nineties too? Myers: The late nineties, 2000. So I chaired the business school one doing the samething for a number of years. Right. I forgot all about that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is that now just a common appurtenance? Myers: I don’t know if it even continued. I kind of doubt it because the deals got socompetitive that I think at the end, you couldn’t get Stanford in. Venturecapitalists said, “I want $2 million or nothing.” And so you couldn’t pry themback and get Stanford in. So I think it deteriorated at the end of the boomcycle, and I don’t know what’s happened today, if it’s still going on. They hadone for the athletic fund; they had two or three of these going. Berkeley triedto get one going, but it was too late. I don’t know if they did or not. It was agreat thing.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well. I’m now at the end of my questions.  Myers: Okay, good! [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now, it’s your turn! Myers: My turn! I don’t have any questions!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What should we talk about that we haven’t talked about? Myers: I don’t know! [chuckling] You’ve been good with all your questions.You’vecovered a lot, I guess. I hope it’s helpful.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I can’t thank you enough. You were extremely articulate, and I learned alot. Myers: Well, you’re welcome.
Interviewer: It is March 10, 2010! Lucas: Ye gods! We lost a year quickly! [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And I am talking to Mr. Donald L. Lucas, the first interview. Mr. Lucas, let usstart back with your family and what it was like to grow up in the household,wherever it was. Give me a feeling of what your childhood and education waslike. Lucas: So how long should this be? [laughter] No, I'm serious. Two minutes?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, let's say ten minutes. Lucas: Okay. I was born in Upland, California. My family—they were ranchers inSouthern California. And on the Lucas side they started in Belgium, and theywent to Iowa. You know the Belgian horses—the big horses? Well, theyraised them there, and then went to Iowa, then went out to Cucamonga,California and started ranching.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And about when was that? Lucas: Oh that would be—I don't want to be too precise—but 1870, something likethat timeframe. On my mother's side, they were from Alsace-Lorraine,German-French. My grandfather had a big beard and he was old—when Iknew him he was about ninety-four, ninety-five years old. He had led wagontrains across, and he was very proud he never had to kill an Indian. And he leda number across to California, so pioneers.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: From the Midwest. Lucas: From the Midwest. So in a way, we're pioneer California. And there weren'tvery many people out there. We raised grapes, and out of the grapes we madewine, and then we had peaches and oranges and apricots.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How much land?  Lucas: Fifteen hundred acres. The milk ranch was down in Chino, which is south ofCucamonga, and I didn't spend much time there. My father was presidentbecause he had the greatest number of shares. So I worked on the ranch andstarted working there—we were, of course, all broke during the Depression.What we've been through now, it doesn't seem like much. I mean, we werereally broke then. But fortunately, we had some food to eat.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because you were growing it. Lucas: Exactly, but I started working at twelve years old at the ranch and madetwelve and a half cents an hour and learned the value of money. Before that Ihad sold lemonade in front of the house for a dime, and the neighbors helpedmake it and they gave me the stuff free. One summer I made $55 sellinglemonade! But anyway, we were Catholic, and so I went to a Catholic grammar school. Iwas an altar boy and all that. And so I had a pretty good education. But thenright near us there was a big public high school called Chaffey Union HighSchool. I was the youngest of three boys. My older brother, John, never gotless than an A, and my middle brother [Richard]—he was the good-lookingone, and he had real cute girlfriends, but he swam, and he was more relaxedabout life. I, of course, was the baby, and I played sports. When I got into highschool, I got a B, and the teacher said, “And you're John Lucas's brother?”[laughter] And I'll never get over that. I'll never get over that. But I didn't getall A's like my brother. But my brother got his undergraduate degree at Berkeley, he got his master'sat Davis, and his PhD at UCLA.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: In what? Lucas: In engineering. And then he went to the Max Planck Institute in Berlin, andthis was when Russians were still there—it was a postdoc there. So I visitedhim there and that was a lot of fun, but that's getting ahead of the story. But heended up as number two guy at JPL [Jet Propulsion Laboratory] at Caltech; heis really smart. My mom—we called her Gogo—she was the greatest, and she lived to 103!And so all my friends up here got to know her. She was really super; she wasa great mom.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: With three boys in the family, were you all being pushed in differentdirections in terms of professions?  Lucas: What happened is something called World War II.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, there was that thing. Lucas: And they went away to war, and my brother John was commissioned atAnnapolis, and my other brother Richard was a hospital corpsman in theUnited States Navy. Both of them ended up in the Pacific, but my brotherJohn almost died, of an infection. I was captain of both the football team and the basketball team, and they neversaw me play. That was sad for me because I had a lot of fun. I was vicepresident of the student body, etc. So I had a great high school—it was justidyllic. It was a public high school, so we had quite a number of Mexicansbecause there were quite a number of Mexicans in the area. And then ourfullback was black—Lucius Harvey, a great guy, and so I learned to get alongand to lead and to help others do better. And I think the sports really helpedme, in my business.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because of having to work with teams? Lucas: Working on a team. I’m a team player, very much a team player. I was very fortunate I had a scholarship—an athletic scholarship, notacademic—to Notre Dame and UCLA, USC. Then Stanford offered me one!And my advisors told me, go to Stanford. They didn’t even offer me a trip uphere, but I came and of course I haven’t regretted it, had a great time atStanford, took economics, and I really had, again, just a great time. After I graduated, I went on to Stanford Business School where I majored infinance. Lucas: I was the housemother for the fraternity which included at least a third of thefootball team. They weren’t all doing well in school, so I had to keep themquiet, and I told them I could get better grades, and they did.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, but you played football as a Stanford undergraduate. Lucas: I played football, but we didn’t do that well, unfortunately. But the year after Igraduated we went to the Rose Bowl, and that was fun. But I didn’t havemuch money, so I tutored the rich kids in undergraduate accounting. It was really very helpful, because if you can tutor somebody, it means you reallyunderstand the subject.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, that’s very true. Lucas: It’s very interesting. I would highly recommend it to anybody.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you see majoring in economics and then going on to finance in businessschool as just kind of a continuation of the business of the ranch? Lucas: Yes, I have left out—my father had a heart attack when I was young, and so Igot involved with the ranch business early on. As an example, the ranch waspaying excess profits taxes when they should have used the money to improvethe orchards instead of paying taxes. Lucas: During World War II.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why was that? Was that just standard? Lucas: That was standard, yes. We had some relatives in the business who I determined they weren’t as smartas they thought they were. So I learned about business, and I had to do a littlebit as a youngster, but nothing too severe. But I read the Fortune businessmagazines that were stacked up. Fortune used to be a great magazine, thebusiness magazine. And I played cards; I learned how to count real fast andremember things, and so all that helped.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you were good at it, obviously. Lucas: I was good at it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But did it also grab you? Lucas: Oh I was going to be involved with finance. My grandfather had started abank in Cucamonga, but was forced out of the banking business by Bank ofAmerica! And so it kind of ran in the blood. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But your parents weren’t saying, “Now Don, you know you’ve got thisbackground, you would be—” Lucas: No, no, I did it myself.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: This was all generated by yourself. Lucas: Self, yes. But see, being the baby in the family, you know, I was spoiled. Andalso, my father wasn’t well and so Mom was busy. We didn’t have help oranything like that, so she was really busy. And so pretty well at a young age Idid my own thing.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Once your father became ill, did you become kind of the financial head of thefamily? Lucas: No, that was when I was eight years old, so that was early, that was early.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, you were too young. Lucas: That was early, that was early. But it certainly got me on the way,progressively.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were there any long-lasting implications of the economics major at Stanford? Lucas: Oh yes, oh yes, absolutely!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How does that tie into what comes later? Or does it at all? Lucas: Economics is all encompassing. In fact, today, this instant, it’s much moreapplicable than at many other times, because we’re in deepfinancial/economic trouble today. As we go forward I can tell you how I’vebeen involved in economics. And yes, absolutely. It’s a good background.Accounting is fundamental because if you understand how the numbers cometogether, you can better understand how people maybe can cheat. Or you canbetter understand how to ask them more detailed information to learn more. Inother words, the numbers mean a lot to me, and so I could process them fasterthan most. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did that all turn out to be very helpful when you began to invest? Lucas: Yes, absolutely!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And you could look at the books and really make sense out of them in a waythat I imagine a lot of people couldn’t, including certainly myself. Lucas: Well, I don’t want to say that, but it gave me a head start. And then I went inthe army for a couple of years; I got a direct commission because I had anMBA.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Tell about that. That was the time of the Korean War? Lucas: Yes, and then I volunteered to go overseas. [chuckling] That’s when mybrother John was in Berlin, and I’d never of course been to Europe. So Ivolunteered, and if there wasn’t a space open, I was going to Korea,expedited. Fortunately, there was a space open so I went to Germany. I alsospeak some German. I spent close to two years there, and I had a great timebecause I worked for the Surgeon General of the Seventh Army, which ran allthe ground troops in Germany. So I got to see, and I have a great respectactually for the military.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And why? Lucas: They’re dedicated. They truly are dedicated to our country and to theirprofession. I was the only second lieutenant at Headquarters 7th Army, and Iwas the only non-regular army, and so I associated with the professionals.And they were professional in what they did. They weren’t perfect of course.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now you’re talking about officers? Lucas: Oh, I would just deal with officers. I ran several clubs, and that’s where I didget in touch with some of the sergeants who were a little less professional. Butthe officers—we had one who was a hero in World War II, and so we talkedabout what he did. He took on the German tanks—he’s just walking along andhe took on tanks with his grenades and all. This man had a superabundance ofcourage, so it was fun talking to him, very exciting.  And then I went to Berlin, and I asked why—we had the oxtail soup—whywas it so greasy? “Well, that’s the way the Russians like it.” So I got my tasteof the Russians, which wasn’t attractive. They have a lake there, on our side,on the west side there’s all these little sailing boats, and on the other sidethere’s no boats; that’s the Russian side. So I went in and walked around inEast Berlin. You see the war and the Wall; it was something you can’t forget.So it was a good start.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: When the Wall fell, it must have had particular meaning for you. Lucas: Oh, it was exciting, yes. To see the people penned up, so to speak, and thenyou went down Stalinallee, a broad street with a pretty façade and new and allthat. One room wide—just for show, not to live in, so that was my first tasteof the Russians. But then I came back, and I interviewed at what people told me was the bestinvestment banking firm at that time on Wall Street—the best trainingprogram was Smith Barney & Company. I came home, and they accepted me.I had Christmas at home and then I went back to work at New York. And Iwas in the corporate finance department and—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Finance because that had been your specialty? Lucas: That’s what I wanted to do, yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But you didn’t say why. Lucas: I’m sorry—to make money!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh! [laughter] Lucas: You know what they say about money—you want to be where the money is.[chuckling] Okay. You know, I was used to working, and I worked harderthan anybody else. I didn’t have any money, so that’s all I could do anyway.And so I was the most successful one in the department.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Meaning what? You had more clients and more connections? How did itwork?  Lucas: Well, at that young age, you don’t have clients. This is when I was twentyfive/twenty-six.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Tell me what you were doing. Lucas: I worked for the senior partner, Charles B. [Barney] Harding, and theHardings owned a big share of the firm. And they were rich. He was a verynice person, and I traveled with him. I’d write speeches for him, and we’dtravel to a steel mill, and there’d be a client at the steel mill, like YoungstownSheet and Tube was a client. And so I’d go and learn about steel! He wasreally very nice, too. His brother was Bill Harding, William Barclay Harding.My roommate worked for him. Mr. Harding advised the Rockefellersamongst others. As you know, the Rockefellers had a lot of money and in thatgeneration were doing what amounts to venture capital.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, I read that. But they didn’t call it venture capital, right? Lucas: It was private capital, private investments—whatever you want to call it. There were three of us in a small uptown apartment. The third person wasDaniel Lee Ritchie. He worked for Robert Lehman at Lehman Brothers. So,we would often compare notes of how the two firms did some things in asimilar fashion and other things very differently. While at Smith Barney, I went down to Venezuela to look at some oil things.I was the young kid on the big oil deal. A partner, of course, was in charge.We went into Colombia, and there was a coal development project there justoff the Caribbean. The coal was located near Barranquilla. So we went to thecapital of Bogotá and that was a lot of fun. Of course I’d never been to SouthAmerica. I tried to find a small emerald—I’d heard that they have emeralds there—formy mom, but I couldn’t find a store, and I never did figure that out. I wentthrough Panamá and did gamble a little bit and was winning some money, andthen they got me high, and I lost all the money. But it was right where mywife-to-be lived—one block away from there. But then I came back home to the U.S. I had gotten to know the head of ourMinneapolis office, Ken Joas, and Kenny said, “Look, they’re starting thisnew computer company, and maybe they need some money, or something.”That’s what our business was, right? And so I went to the real smart partner inthe company, Mr. [Charles W.] Kennard, who had just recently developed theconcept of the convertible bond. This was a better way to raise money. He didthe first big subordinate convertible bonds; a bond that’s convertible into stock. That’s a convertible bond, the first ones. We were the leaders. SmithBarney was the leader. I thought he would be the appropriate person to introduce this concept of thenew computer company Control Data. I went with the president of thecompany, Mr. Norris, to meet Mr. Kennard. I will never forget it. Mr.Kennard was very patronizing and said, “No, we are not interested.” So Mr.Norris got up and walked out the door, and I ran after him. I said, “Whoa,don’t go away!” He went away and I lost the deal.Later on Mr. Joas had another deal and he said, “They’re starting this newsemiconductor company and you should look at it.” So I talked to them andkind of the same thing happened. I met with the people; it was a group thathad left Sperry Rand Semiconductor—Sperry Semiconductor in Long Island.They had gone across the bay to Danbury, Connecticut to start the company. Itsounded good to me. What I knew about semiconductors you can putunderneath your nonexistent little nail.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that your first exposure to high-tech industry? Lucas: Control Data didn’t exist then. This was 1957, so it really hadn’t happened.Much hadn’t happened, certainly not back in New York.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Where are you with Smith Barney? Lucas: I’m in New York City, all that time in New York. The whole business was inNew York. I tried to get Smith Barney to open up out here. I wanted to goback to California.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why didn’t they? Things were beginning to happen here. Lucas: They made a big mistake, that’s what.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, I bet. Lucas: And a friend of mine, Bill [William K.] Bowes, whom you might haveinterviewed—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, I have.  Lucas: Bill ran this operation for Blyth. In fact, while I was at Stanford, I had talkedto Mr. Charles Blyth about going to Wall Street. And I said, “Well, how aboutcoming to work for you, sir?” “Go back to New York and learn from the bigboys.” [chuckling] Well, I want to go back to Mr. Harding and whoever elsecame into the Smith Barney thing. I was the hardest worker in the department,and I got my work done.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And that’s what they saw? Lucas: And these were statistics.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is that what they saw in you? Lucas: Oh yes. And I did the grunt labor. I had a secretary, and she’d type them up,the preparations for pitches to get new business. We were quite successful,and I enjoyed that. I really did enjoy it a lot, but it wasn’t very creative.[chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What do you mean? Lucas: Well, I wanted to do more than just do what were called comparisons. Like inpricing something—how do you price a bond? Well, you compare thecompany with other similar companies, and so you compare their sales growthand their earnings, their profitability—all information obtained from auditreports, accounting reports.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see, so you were spending a lot of time perusing documents. Lucas: Working on numbers and doing it fast, accurately, and then helping the salespitch to the client, but the partner would do that. I would just provide him withthe background information.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now would the partners do any of this? Lucas: I do all the work. They make all the money. [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, but also isn’t there a division of knowledge? Even if they chose to, theyprobably wouldn’t have the facility with numbers that you had.  Lucas: Oh these guys—they were very smart. Oh they were talented, and I learned agreat deal from them. Like when we traveled to South America, we traveledwith a lawyer from Davis Polk, a big law firm, and he thought he should havebecome the Secretary of State. So these were very accomplished people, andwe were there to win.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you’re learning a lot, and it sounds to me as though you were beingstretched. Lucas: [pause] Not as fast as I wanted to be! [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So where is this ambition coming from? Lucas: I like to win! There’s nothing like winning. Sure! Absolutely, winning’simportant—not the only thing, but it’s quite important. It’s better than losing!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You figured that out early on, didn’t you! All right. You were getting bored, iswhat I’m picking up on. Lucas: No, I love working hard, and I love the winning, winning the account, and wewon our fair share. But remember Bill Harding, brother of the senior partner,worked with and for the Rockefellers, so there was that. And so that obviouslygot me going.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you ever actually deal with the Rockefeller group directly? Lucas: Not directly. No, my roommate did, and we talked about it at night. Mr.Lehman and his firm were big investors, important people in Wall Street, andso we would discuss it. You know kids—we’d talk.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And were you kids picking up on quite a number of differences in thephilosophies behind each of these firms? Lucas: Oh yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What kind of conversations were you having?  Lucas: Well, it’s all about profits, and so this investment banking business isrelatively easy. Trying to figure out whether or not this coal mine in Colombiais a good deal or not—that’s complicated. And just to finish that story: theyhave just started production some fifty plus years later. I was a little ahead ofmy time. [laughter] Or the promoter was a little ahead of his time.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you came back from that trip thinking it was a good deal, that SmithBarney should— Lucas: No, no. I didn’t know that much. See, I hadn’t done a complete enough job inanalyzing energy. Back then we had lots of oil, so it wasn’t in the demand as itis today. So I hadn’t done my homework.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That was a lesson, wasn’t it? Lucas: Right. It wasn’t a failure, because I was helping a client. But we shouldn’thave gone there in the first place. We’re talking to Standard Oil of Colombia.Their lawyer was our counsel in Bogotá. We touched oil there but that’s all.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It was early. You’re faulting yourself for not picking up on that, but couldanybody have picked it up? Lucas: Oh yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So it was a matter of doing your homework? Lucas: What’s the economics—and there we go back to economics. Because it wason the coast, but it’s now where they take off to take the drugs out of thecountry. It’s near Barranquilla. But the infrastructure was going to be veryexpensive. It’s easier to transport oil than it is coal.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You didn’t pick up on any of that? Lucas: Not at the time.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, you were a young guy. You had something to learn.  Lucas: A lot! But I was working for the firm, and the firm wanted me to do this, andI said, “Super!” And I ended up at Christmas in my home, see my folks, a freetrip.But then what really got me going was the Control Data Corporation. Andhere was this guy had worked for the Navy and secret aspects of thegovernment to develop new computers. So I thought this was a hot deal, andof course it turned out to be a very hot deal. And I bought 1,000 shares. Andit went up, a lot of money, so—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Where was the computer industry at that stage? Are we talking about latefifties? Lucas: Late-fifties, yes. Well, IBM existed then—to show you how far back they go.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Had you been following the development? Lucas: No.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How did you know that computers were a good thing, then? Lucas: Computers, by definition, they had a good market, and IBM sold at astratospheric price even then. So this was a new computer, and it worked forthe government. This was good.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: These are huge, massive computers, aren’t they? Lucas: Not that massive, but expensive. But there’s room for both.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So who was buying them? Lucas: The U. S. government.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And that was enough market? Lucas: That was enough. And this fellow—he had led the development. It’s a simplestory. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And it wasn’t Silicon Valley. Lucas: And it was not Silicon Valley. Lucas: And then National Semiconductor— There were eight engineers, and they hadleft Sperry Semiconductor en masse. So Smith Barney said, “No, we won’t doit.” So I said, “Fine. I’ll raise the money myself.” So I went to my friends—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Wow. But you were still employed at Smith Barney? Lucas: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And it was okay for you just to go out and do your own thing? Lucas: As long as there was no conflict of interest. Well, I just went ahead and did it.And I asked all the people in the department whether they wanted to invest—Iwasn’t doing anything illegal!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, but I can imagine a firm not being too happy about an employee goingout and— Lucas: Well, you’ll see—you’re kind of right, unfortunately. One of my roommates here at Stanford Business School was Bill Witter, DeanWitter’s son. And we were also in the fraternity; we became good friends, andall. A great guy, unfortunately he recently died. And he was working at theDean Witter office uptown. Of course, he lived in a different place than I did[chuckling]. He went in a limousine to work and all that. I liked going to hisclub every so often. And so he put in some money; he was the biggestinvestor. And then I just happened to meet some people. My parents and I justgot it together and got it going with the fellow from Minneapolis. So then I goin to my boss Nelson Schaenen and say, “I’d like to go on the board ofdirectors.” “Well, we’ll have to consider that.” And then they came back andsaid, “You can’t do it.” And you might have picked up on my personality thatthat wouldn’t have been very well received. [chuckling] And I said, “Why?”He said, “Well, it could hurt our reputation.” I said, “Come on, I’m a clerkaround here! I just do numbers, right? How can that hurt your reputation?” Idid well at biz school [but] we hadn’t learned how to be a director. No courseson directors, and I’m not sure there is one even to this day! And it’s somethingI’ve spent a lot of time on subsequently—being director, chairman of theboard, et cetera. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And no education, no classes. Lucas: No specific area—yes. So I didn’t know what I was talking about, but Iwanted to be a director. And he said [I] couldn’t. So I said, “Fine, Mr.Schaenen—I quit.” And he said “Don, you don’t want to do that. You’redoing great here, and you’ve got a great future.” And I said—[chuckling] I’membarrassed about it—“I want to be a director.” “Can’t do it.” I said, “Bye.”And so I went home for Christmas and all that sort of thing.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You’re not married yet. Lucas: No, I’m not married, and I don’t have any money. It would have been a veryunhappy wife if I had been married. I’ve got no responsibilities.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I know, but I’m also thinking that you were doing this without havinganything in the bank. Lucas: I never even thought about that; didn’t give it a second thought.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why? Lucas: Hubris. I was going to win! [laughter] I’ve got to be honest! I probably didn’thave time to think about it. I’m not a contemplative type, as you’ve probablygathered. One of our investors—this is the Good Lord taking over—one ofour investors was going through Idlewild Airport at the time, now John F.Kennedy. So I saw him and he said, “You should look into this firm. There’s anew firm being formed.” This is the last part of 1959-60, right in there. “Youshould really look into it because they’re making these types of investments.”There was no name for the company, but they financed small companies. Isaid, “Thanks a million.” And so one of the fellows that I had trained with atSmith Barney was Bob Schumm’s son, Jack. Bob Schumm was RowanGaither’s investment advisor.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh okay. We’re getting somewhere, aren’t we? Lucas: The plot thickens! The plot thickens! [laughter] So I decided to come here toPalo Alto to be interviewed, and so I arranged to be interviewed by Draper,Gaither & Anderson, with Mr. Gaither’s help. They said they were looking forfive guys. And I said, “One out of five—I should be able to make that!” <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Draper, Gaither & Anderson was founded maybe 1958? Lucas: No, they really started in ’60.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you’re getting in at the very beginning, aren’t you? Lucas: Oh sure, oh sure. So I go to my boss, Nelson—Mr. Schaenen. “Mr. Schaenen,I want to go and be interviewed by DG&A.” And he said, “I won’t tell thepartners because it’ll ruin your career here.” Really, I am still touched by that.So I go to Palo Alto. I really don’t remember being in Palo Alto other than thePalo Alto Creamery. But they had their office at 145 Addison, and I was goingfor one for five. Well, it turns out they’d already hired four—Bill Draper, BillSymonds, who was the accountant, Tom Carey, and Crawford Cooley. Thefifth was me.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And you don’t have any connections. Lucas: Of course not. Who cares about connections; we just create connections. ButI’m smart and I can do the job.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That’s what you told them. Lucas: Absolutely. And I got sent up to Rowan Gaither.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Give us a little background on Rowan Gaither. Who is he and what is hisbackground? Lucas: Well, Rowan was fabulous. He had brain cancer, and they hoped that he hadgotten well. And he had accomplished a great deal. At one time he had beenhead of the MIT Rad Lab during World War II; head of the Ford Foundation;He started Rand Corporation and Mitre Corporation in Boston. And a verythoughtful person, a wonderful person. His son Jimmy [James C.]subsequently went to Stanford, and he was chairman of the board of trustees atStanford for a number of years, and head of the Cooley Law Firm, so you seehe took after his father.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: There was some substance there.  Lucas: They were a great family. And I’d come from back East, and so it was decidedthat I would work for Rowan because he spent a great deal of time there.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why did they hire you? Lucas: Because I’m so good!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Come on, why did they? Lucas: I don’t know! [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You never found out? Lucas: No. I was the only one trained in finance. The only one in the firm. Only one!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All right. So they knew that. Lucas: They did know that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did they check your record? Lucas: I don’t know. I don’t know. But I wouldn’t tell lies.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I’m just wondering how spur of the moment this decision was. Lucas: How spur of the moment? Oh, well, General Anderson, as you’ve probablyheard, was the youngest major general ever. And he’d headed the daylightbombing of Germany, and this man can make decisions quickly. He was like asecond father to me.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you being interviewed by all three principals? Lucas: I don’t think I interviewed with General Draper. I don’t remember that, but Idid with Larry who was more General Anderson’s go-to guy, and then Rowan.And I was supposed to work for Rowan, and we really got along. He’s verysmart. It was sad that he had to go back in the hospital, for his cancer. I usedto visit him in the hospital and all that. This is kind of defining for me. I had done a few deals in addition to National and the experiences in New England,Boston. It was okay; they didn’t quite have it, if you follow me. The talentpool wasn’t that big. It was very interesting.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You mean the opportunities to invest weren’t there? Lucas: Well, we invested in a few of them. But let’s go back to National. Sperry hadsued National Semiconductor. During the trial one of the engineers was beingquestioned about how the junction transistor was made. And they asked,“Why do you put this blue stuff on there?” “Oh, we put on the blue goop;that’s what we did over at Sperry.” And the lawsuit was over. The companywas padlocked. They just shut us down in Danbury, shut the company down.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Really! Because you’d stolen it? Lucas: Yes, we were guilty! The guys admitted they used their technology—bluegoop!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And that was enough? [chuckling] Lucas: Oh yes, that’s way too much.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But how could it not have come out, because presumably he was under oath. Lucas: Well, you don’t have to tell the truth. [chuckling] People do lie! Or they say,“I forget.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So that was the end of that deal. Lucas: First chapter. It’s the next chapter. So another one of my fraternity brotherswas Don [Donald E.] Weeden, Weeden & Company. He was back in NewYork, and they were investors in National Semiconductor. And they put up theget out of jail money—the bail. I’ll never forget going into Sperry Rand withthis top executive looking down at these little dumb Stanford kids, and theyweren’t going to give an inch. Anyway, we gave them their quarter of amillion and they went away, and we continued in business. Bernie Rothlein, the president through this, was asked to leave, and JackHagerty was made president. Jack had a sales background at TexasInstruments. He was not the long-term president. So later on, I had been introduced to Charlie [Charles E.] Sporck, who ran operations for Fairchild.Charlie is a real leader, very strong. There were six or seven of these fellows,and they were all willing to come with him. So I flew back to New York andtalked to the other investors. “Listen, this is the real deal. We’ve got to hireCharlie and the team.” People in New York didn’t believe me. And I said,“Oh.” So he said, “Come back to California and we’ll talk to Charlie and theteam.” So we met, and after a limited conversation in Palo Alto, everyoneagreed that these guys were it. So we hired all of them and they took over. Sothus I was introduced to Silicon Valley.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That’s quite a dramatic entrance. Lucas: And it was very stressful!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How old were you at this point? Lucas: I was thirty-two, thirty-three at this point, and quite exciting because after thenew management was public the stock went through the roof. As they say,“That was all she wrote.”I wanted to get to Silicon Valley and move from back East. I’ll tie thistogether for you—the contrast between what I had personally experienced inBoston and what I experienced here. The East generally was a closed society.What was important is where your family came from and the past. Out here,we were just interested in doing a good job, and not all this family and oldmoney stuff. Instead we would just get the job done. And so that was a prettydefining moment for me.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, it was open out here. You didn’t have to go along— Lucas: Meritorious. The best person wins sort of thing.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And you liked that! [chuckling] Lucas: I liked that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you picked up lock, stock, and barrel? Lucas: Well, we moved the headquarters here. 20<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Give me a synopsis of what Silicon Valley was like. We’re talking about1960? Lucas: It was cherry trees.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And apricots, right? Lucas: Yes. It was beautiful. I used to take a girlfriend down there and look at theorchids. The valley was really pretty. No 280, it was a beautiful place. This isa special place. And I even include Berkeley.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] Well, that’s a different part of the world. Lucas: It’s San Francisco. But really the action’s here. The action’s here.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, what was the action in terms of actual industry? Who was around in1960? Lucas: [with emphasis] HP.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Hewlett-Packard. Lucas: And I was very fortunate in that regard as well. Draper, Gaither & Andersonwanted me to join the Menlo Country Club. It cost all of $1,000, plus orminus.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now why did you do that? Lucas: Because they told me to. The partners. It’s the thing to do. I don’t rememberseeing David Packard there, but the rest of the executive members were there:Bill Hewlett, Noel Porter, Noel Eldridge, Frank Cavier and the rest of his topmanagement. And they invested with us a couple of times. We used to do adeal configuration where we guaranteed a bank loan and then bought commonstock at $1.00, maybe in a five-to-one ratio. There’s lots of leverage; thereweren’t very many shares so that means that if it goes good it goes up a lot, ifit goes bad you lose all.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. Because the investor pool is so small.  Lucas: No, because the number of shares— Like if you raise $500,000 and sell adollar a share, it’s 500,000 shares. If you have a $400,000 bank loan and thenyou raise $100,000, you only have 100,000 shares plus management shares, afewer number of shares. Dave and Bill would guarantee their loan for all theiremployees, and the VP’s could buy the common stock. We did everything onthe same terms. So that’s how they took care of their people. Help out theirVP’s. They were real leaders, fabulous leaders, team builders.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, but they’re taking care of their own, too, in a way. Lucas: That’s what I’m saying! Absolutely! And they’re making money and gettingexposure—everything good. Or if they lose, they learn how not to do that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you get to know them? Lucas: Not that well, not Bill and Dave, but the other fellows. The CFO and thetreasurer and some of the other guys. But they were great guys, really great,and I used to see them at the club.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you learning from them too? Lucas: Oh yes!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was all the conversation about business deals? Lucas: No. We didn’t talk that much about business. But I learned by example. Thiswas teamwork of the highest order when I’m taking my money and effectivelygiving the stock action to my employees. And you can see, that stuck in mymind.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And how new was that to give stock— Lucas: I don’t think many other people did it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And was it up and down the line? All employees?  Lucas: Oh no, no. Just the executives. Because there’s not enough for all theemployees. So we did get to know them, got a chance to chat with them, andthese guys were obviously very good, very good.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And are you using the Country Club, in a sense? It’s becoming a socialnetwork for you, I’m imagining. Lucas: Not very much.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, why were you doing it? Lucas: It was a contributing factor.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you enjoying it? Lucas: I enjoyed the interplay with the fellows. We’d go to the men’s grill and talkwith them and all that stuff. The real moral of the story is these wereimportant men but they had big hearts. Managers were sharing with theirteam. I’ve never forgotten it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It’s still March 10, 2009. I’m still talking very happily with Mr. Lucas, andit’s tape two. I think the time is to mention a wife that comes into your storyabout this time. Lucas: Not too long after I joined the firm, I also had joined this local club inAtherton which is called the Circus Club. And it’s the folks in San Franciscowho would come down here for the summer. They wanted some place to play,so this has a big field for the horses and tennis and swimming, so they couldget together. And you know, a long time ago people didn’t have their ownswimming pools—so they’d have some place to swim and et cetera, gettogether. That’s the Circus Club. So I’d go to a couple of things. But this wason New Year’s Eve, and so I saw this beautiful Latin girl, Lygia SotoHarrison. She had gone to school with my date at Sacred Heart in SanFrancisco!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] With your date! Lucas: Yes! And so they were good friends, and she introduced me, and so I saidmentally, “Bye, bye!” [to my date]. Lygia was Miss Central America, and sothat night I asked her whether she would consider marrying me. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That night! Lucas: I did not waste time. I did not waste time. That’s a true story. And people havekidded me about it ever since.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, where was your date? Lucas: Well, she was still over there. [chuckling] True. I can’t deny it. She wassweet, and then I was proposing. “Hey, listen, this is midnight, let’s go to LasVegas and have a party!” So that didn’t go very far. So anyway we all wenthome. In any case I still had some work to do. Lucas: Right, right. And so—I got a lawyer at the law firm, a young fellow, toarrange a date. That’s how bashful I am. We got married five months later.We had three children Nancy, Alexandra, and Donald. The two girls had beenadopted. So we bought a home in Atherton. In fact, we bought on Selby Lane,and then we moved next to Sacred Heart. We just a couple of years agofinished a house one block down from the original house we had bought—soback to Selby Lane. [My wife] put up with a lot because I worked pretty hardand I traveled a lot.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Had you explained that to her? Lucas: I think she had already figured that out. But she found out the details reallyquickly as soon as she got married, because I had to make money and takecare of the little babies, all that stuff.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But had she been planning to settle in this country? Lucas: Her father had been assigned to the United Nations for Costa Rica. Her familyis an old family from Costa Rica and earlier from Spain, and so that’s how shegot to San Francisco. She had gone to school there and then came backbecause her first husband had died, not too long after getting married,unfortunately for them. It didn’t take me long to propose, et cetera, et cetera.Oh, and I used to go down to Palm Springs, so I brought her down to PalmSprings. Of course my parents had to meet her and that was really tricky.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why?  Lucas: Well, I’m the baby in the family, and so my mother, you know, she had tomeet her, and she was so nervous about—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You mean your wife-to-be was nervous. Lucas: Everybody was nervous. Because I was in a hurry, obviously!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I would say so! [chuckling] And did she pass muster? Lucas: Sure did, and took good care of my mom, Gogo. Back to business. The other thing that was very apparent to me after not toomuch time with the firm, there wasn’t a good understanding of finance by thepartners. Rowan Gaither had died maybe six months or something after Ijoined the firm. He was really smart, a genius—leader.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did he understand finance? Lucas: No, no, but he understands organizations, people. He was a people guy, and heput together some great organizations: Rand and Mitre, Ford Foundation, etcetera, the law firm. He was fabulous, so that was a huge loss. [pause] Youknow, it was clear that we were short, and that’s when I tried to get PeteBancroft to join us, and fortunately he did join us. About the same time,Crawford [Cooley] and I were made partners and Bill [Draper] was not. Sohis father and Bill left the firm. General Draper and his son left the business.General Draper was a very important person and knew a lot of people, etcetera. We didn’t fully realize, however, he didn’t fully understand venturecapital. And his son Bill—a very nice guy had a lovely wife, Phyllis—hadworked at a steel mill, so it wasn’t a good fit. Lucas: Pitch made the adjustment [from the steel mill] much more easily than Bill. Inmy opinion, Pitch really developed into quite an outstanding venturecapitalist.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But let’s say a little bit more about that because they came into what becameknown as venture capital by a very circuitous route. Draper, for example, wasa general. Lucas: Yes, but that’s not how he started. He had been head of Mexican Light andPower and a partner at Dillon and Read before that. Mr. Draper had become an “appointed general,” meaning that he didn’t have a long military education,background. All you’ve got to know about General Anderson—youngestmajor general ever; you know he’s a real hero. Daylight bombing ofGermany; you know he’s got what it takes. He was a great leader. He washonored, revered, and so he knew a number of the people in New York,important people like Jock Whitney, J.H. Whitney and Company, those kindof fellows. And I’ll never forget going to the 21 Club, and 21 Club people justloved him because they love airplanes, all that. I piggybacked on this and hadmany good times there. General Anderson was kind of like a second father to me. He had invested in acompany called Raychem, one penny/share to $150/share. Not many of thosedeals. And he couldn’t miss; he just did one good deal after another. Howevermuch money he wanted just flowed in from these East Coast people. So hewas the spiritual leader and the money raiser, and General Draper was theconservative experienced executive. They both got to know each other as ourrepresentatives at the start of NATO. And so it was a great opportunity to joina real moneymaker and leader.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why didn’t the business go well? Lucas: They weren’t real venture capitalists. DG&A had a significant apartmenthouse investment. General Anderson had made the deal. You know, whenyou get on a roll you think you can’t miss, and that’s when you miss. Andthen we bought some property around San Luis Obispo. Things we shouldn’thave done—it’s not venture capital. It just made no sense at all.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that a function of having endless money? Lucas: No, no. We didn’t have endless. We started with $6 [million] and it wasincreased to 7.6 [million], so we didn’t have endless money. No. Too muchsuccess—too fast and too much.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I’m being presumptuous to question you, but are you perhaps coming from apresent-day perspective? That investment in those days had a much broaderscope, so that you were not necessarily thinking high-tech, high-risk,immediate return? These guys may have thought that investing in real estatewas a great idea. Lucas: [pause] But that’s not what our investors expected.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Really, so venture capital was defined.  Lucas: Well, implicitly, not explicitly perhaps.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What did you understand it to be? Lucas: Small companies that are going to grow into big companies. That’s whatGeneral Anderson was successful at. He started Lear Siegler, RoyalIndustries, Raychem—he had a tremendous string of successes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Okay, so I’m wrong in my perception. Lucas: Well, I don’t want to say that, but— [chuckling]. Really, the message is don’tread your press clippings because then you’ll get a little infatuated withyourself. And the balance had gone away. Rowan had died; General Draperhad left. So I had to re-negotiate a loan at Bankers Trust for $1.5 millionwhich we couldn’t repay.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Ooh boy. Lucas: Ooh boy.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What are you thinking at that time? Lucas: What am I thinking? How not to tell my wife we’re moving out of Atherton.We can’t afford it. [chuckling] So General Anderson left the partnership.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because of that one bad deal? Lucas: No, no, no. We had several bad deals. See, he used to drill up all his incomeby drilling oil wells, and he didn’t find that much oil in Oklahoma. And I waspresident of the oil company. We developed a gas stripping plant inpartnership with Continental Oil. And they told us—I’ll never forget this—[there were] reserves of 110 billion cubic feet. And we only had 10. So thatcompany was broke. We had bank loans, etc.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that deception? Lucas: Oh, no, no, no. I’m sorry, the people in Oklahoma said that—the experts, thegeologists. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, but— Lucas: We were deceived, yes, but not deception. They made a mistake; they made amistake. But then General Anderson went down there with his old friends andsaid, “There’s more gas near us, and we’ve got to go over and get it.” And hetalked the guys into doing that and resurrected that investment. Whew. Butthat was close, and then we were public and the stock goes down and all thatsort of thing. But then we had the loan at the bank, and so they left it to thekids.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: The new people. Lucas: Yes. I think Larry stayed on, Larry Duerig. I’m not sure about that, but it wasLarry and Crawford and me. Bill Symon wasn’t a partner—and Pete.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, you haven’t talked about Pete yet. Lucas: We’ll get there. But I’d like to keep the train of thought. It is important tounderstand what the general partners arrangement with the limited partnerwas. We believed we had a great deal. The economics were—we had a lowsalary, $25,000—but we had 40 percent of the profits!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That was an incentive, wasn’t it! Lucas: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: They were giving you a low salary to give you incentive. Lucas: Yes. Incentive. See, the generals didn’t need it. They had their other income.And for the youngsters—that was enough. A much different concept than intoday’s venture capital partnerships, which are typically around an early fee of2 percent of the capital and 20 percent of the profits. And frankly I think that’sa big mistake.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, expand on why that is. Lucas: Well, because, the more money you raise, the more money you make. So, let’sraise a lot of money. Not how can I employ that money wisely? Sometimesyes, sometimes no. There’s been a couple of firms that have done it, and they’re wonderful firms—KP [Kleiner Perkins], Sequoia, Mayfield andothers. Sutter Hill, the fellows across the street. There are a number of firmsthat have done well. But too much money is a common problem. Becauseinherently, these are smaller investment deals, and they are not infinitelyextrapolable. And so I think the VC business today is in some, if you will, disarray. Maybetoo many firms. There’s a finite number of new industries that you canparticipate in, right? They’re not infinite. And so perhaps we have too muchmoney chasing too few good deals.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, I’ve heard that before. Lucas: And too much interest income, the fee, the 2 percent.In other words, if I canraise a billion dollars, I get $20 million a year to spend. The partners keepmost of it and have some employees go out and do the work. Good deal! Butis it such a good deal for the investors? Perhaps not. So things were kind of tight. Around ’65 or so, Doug [Douglas C.] Leanderfrom the Bankers Trust was coming here from Phoenix to call their note, callthe bank note. Now that’s serious—then you go broke, right? And I kid withpeople and I say, “I play tough. His plane crashed. And he never made it.” Itdid, unfortunately, I’m sorry. And so it gave us some time, and we worked ourway out of that. But that was how close, that was really close. That was howclose. It was tough.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Terribly unfortunate for him and his family, but there you are on your specialstar. Lucas: Well, and my fingernails gone away. That was tight, but we worked our waythrough, and then some investments matured and did well.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you tell your wife any of these scary stories? Did she have any clue? Lucas: Well, she wasn’t that interested in business. She thinks about her children andjust spends money, like any good woman, you know. I would have the guysover, and so she generally knew what was going on.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: When things are going wrong, as in that incident, are you worried a lot? Whatare you doing when things go wrong? Lucas: Work harder. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes? How would working harder solve that problem? Lucas: Well, figure out where we could sell a company, or how to make more money,how to redeploy assets. This is where Pete just did a brilliant job. He tookcharge of a number of investments in our companies and ended up sellingthem at good prices. He really did a superb job. A superb job.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How did he come to be there? Lucas: Didn’t I say that?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh that’s right. You did say that. Lucas: We needed talent, and I introduced him, and they agreed, and we brought himin.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How did you know him? Lucas: From Wall Street. We knew each other back there.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And you were impressed? Lucas: I was. Pete has a number of things that I don’t have. He’s very sophisticatedand articulate, and he’s much more polite than I am—a number of things. Hecame from money, and I’m a farmer, and so he gets along with these peoplemuch better than I do. Really.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Has that held you back ever? Lucas: I don’t think so. He became president of Bessemer. He’s got a wonderful waywith people.But we’re different personalities as you can tell. So I think together we madeone hell of a team. See Crawford ran the books, ran the office, took care of thesecretaries and the back office. And that’s why I wanted him to be here [at theinterview] because he could correct some of the things and make it moreaccurate. He’s older, and he had that law firm sort of background. It was ateam effort. 30<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How would you categorize what you were doing? What was your job? Lucas: Make money.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Does that mean also spotting the deals? Lucas: Yes, recruiting, trying to make deals. I’m pretty creative on deal structure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, explain what creativity means in this context. Lucas: You know, how you structure the ownership of a company. I just had moreexperience than they had in that sort of thing because I’d been doing it for awhile, you remember. .<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So we’re now in mid to late— Lucas: ’65.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And you’ve been doing this risk investment since fifty— Lucas: Well, ’57 or so. This was jumping in the fire. Things got hot real quick.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All this new blood that’s coming into the firm, are they working as hard asyou are? Lucas: No, but there wasn’t much new blood. The only new blood was really Pete.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That’s true. Lucas: Pete did a fine job selling some companies; he just did a superb job of it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did his social skills coming into it? Lucas: Absolutely. He got along with the investment bankers, and he just did awonderful job for us. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So he was a wonderful addition. Lucas: Oh! Fabulous! But I was a little upset with him when we both went toOklahoma when we were told that we only had a small fraction of the naturalgas we thought we had. He said I was a loser, and I didn’t like that, because itwasn’t my deal. It was General Anderson’s deal, and I didn’t know anythingabout oil.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And he called you a loser? Lucas: Yes!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Or he called the deal— Lucas: No, he called me, personally, and that hurt my feelings, so I had to prove hewas wrong. [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It was just more incentive, wasn’t it? [chuckling] Lucas: Yes, and so I did! And so we ended up making good money. We worked ongetting an adjacent gas field connected to us, so we worked through that, butthat was tough. And that’s—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you behind it, once the decision was made to go after the gas? Lucas: Well, there was no choice. We had a plant with no gas.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So the decision had been made. Lucas: No, not a decision. We had to sell them [on the idea] to let us process theirgas. Continental Oil had this field. I don’t know whether it was Continental, tobe honest. I’ve honestly forgotten, but there was this adjacent gas field thatGeneral Anderson knew the big wheels in it, and he was successful. We werejust dying, and we put a pipeline in there and everything was fine.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I’m sorry. I got the deals mixed up. I was thinking about the one where the oildidn’t work out.  Lucas: That’s the one! You’re right, absolutely right. We ran out of gas. There wassupposed to be 110 [billion cubic feet]; there was only 10. So we’d beenmisled by the geologists. But we went to an adjacent pool where they wereflaring the gas, and so we put a pipeline over there connected to our plant.Everything ends up happily ever after—after some heart attacks.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: If things were going well, what was the reason behind the demise of thepartnership in 1966? Right? Lucas: Eventually, 1967. We liquidated the partnership and we made good money. Itwas terminated in 1966.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And why the termination? Lucas: Because we made a good deal of money. And so we ended up going to anoffice down here in Palo Alto on Stanford property. I continued doing thesame thing which I do today. I’ve just continued on. And people all did theirown individual thing. I obviously like this business.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Maybe it’s because I don’t understand how these things go, but if you’remaking good money why are you stopping? Lucas: We got other people’s money.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh! You’ve used up the fund. Lucas: The fund’s fully invested, and we have other people’s money.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. And you spent it all Lucas: We invested it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] Okay. Lucas: And we can’t get our share out until liquidation. The limited partners(including the general partners, limited partner and investor) received theirshare of the capital invested plus 60 percent, and we received out share of the40 percent of the profits. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It was the terms of the deal. Lucas: Yes, the structure of the partnership. In all candor, I think that we had gonethrough a very difficult time, and we’d just as soon go our separate ways, sortof. Now, we weren’t mad at each other or anything like that. None of that, butit was stressful. And we had made a fair amount of money, so let’s go do whatwe each want to do. Pete went back to New York, and General Anderson,Larry, Crawford, and I continued the office together.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Everybody had more or less come to an agreement that it was time to moveon? Lucas: Oh, we all agreed, of course. We were at the finish line and we were tired. Itwas just natural. It was the terms of the deal. The original term was fiveyears—way too short. So we extended it two years, and that was adequate, butwe had to hustle. And thus Pete selling these companies became even moreimportant. That’s how we gained liquidity.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But this system that is so common now, where you raise a fund, and it has atleast a tentative expiration date, right? Either the company is sold or acquiredor something. Lucas: Interest in the companies.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: The companies, yes, because it’s a big fund. Was that something that Draper,Gaither & Anderson had dreamed up? To invest in that manner? Or had youbeen doing it that way before? Lucas: No, and this is new! No one had done it this way. Let’s start over again. Noone had done this before. What had been done before—we touched on it—theRockefellers. They used their own money, put their own money up, makesome investment, and as it turned out they did very well. So the expiration isincidental. It’s their money.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I understand that. Lucas: But now we have OPM—“other people’s money.” And they’d like to see theirmoney back, too. And the general partners would like to put our hands on ourprofits. But I think the key thing that may be missed is the five-year [term]was not wise. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, it was too short. Lucas: Too short, so we forced liquidity on these investments, so we added two yearsto it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What I’m trying to drive home— What I’m trying to get you to say [Lucaschuckles] is that this was really novel. Lucas: What was novel?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Having this— Lucas: A limited partnership.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes! Lucas: Well, it was the first one, yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But you didn’t say that, you see. Lucas: Oh, well—okay. [laughter] Well, why didn’t you say it? Sure, it was the firstone. It was done before us—we had nothing to do with it. We’re youngsters.This was done probably by Rowan and Ed Huddleson at the Cooley law firm.That’s probably where it originated.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And was it just a logical thing to invent this new mechanism for makingmoney? Lucas: Yes, yes, yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And it didn’t have any direct precedents. Lucas: I don’t want to say that; I’m not sure. See, the whole idea of a partnership is totake people with money, and let the managers invest it. So there’s nothingnew about that. But it was what we did with the money, i.e., invest in smallcompanies. There was one firm, AR&D in Boston, American Research andDevelopment. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, [Georges] Doriot. Lucas: Doriot. We both were at the very beginning. And fortunately we’d come backfrom a difficult position. And so we wanted to take our hard-earned profitsand put it in our own accounts. And so that’s what we did and very happily.Subsequently I’ve done this with my own money, and I’ve had unlimitedpeople and firms invest with us. You can see that that left a blot on my mind,that working in a partnership is tough.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] All right. Why don’t we pick up that theme next time. Thank you. Lucas: Sure, sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Today is March 24, 2009. It is our second interview with Mr. Donald L.Lucas. I want to start where we left off, which was your years at Draper— Lucas: Draper, Gaither, Anderson—DG&A.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, exactly. I was going to pick up at the point of your decision to terminatethe partnership. I assume that you were making some choices about how youwanted to work from then on. You’d been working as a group, and as we bothknow, ever since you have been working as a freelancer. Lucas: You’re setting me up. Is that what this is called? [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I’m setting you up! Lucas: I want to clarify. I try to be accurate. I didn’t leave. We liquidated the firm. Itwas terminated, and so we were all free to do what we want. There were noentangling alliances, et cetera. However, a number of us, General Anderson,Larry Duerig, Crawford Cooley, and I all went to another office on Sand HillRoad. Well, prior to that on Welch Road, but then we moved to Sand Hill. Ithink we lost a couple—General Anderson at that time and Larry. Maybe itwas just Crawford and myself [who went to Sand Hill].  But to your question: it was difficult for me because [pause] investing tends tobe more of a personal thing for me, and particularly when it comes to thecompanies. I believe that by spending time with the companies and helpingthem, you can increase the chances of greater success. Other people havedifferent views. So that’s a different style. The firms today—these big multibillion dollar venture capital firms—they’re more investors as opposed to, say,partners or whatever word you want to use.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. You put your money in and you want it out, but with a greaterdetachment from the company itself? Lucas: Well, I would put it the other way around. I get to know the executives, andthen I want to help them and help them grow, and of course, help us, help themoney investors in the process. But it’s more hands on—that’s the point.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is that an older style of venture capital? Most of the people I’ve talked with sofar seem to have a similar philosophy. It’s not to them just you put yourmoney in and you walk away—it’s a very personal engagement with thecompany. Lucas: You’re saying the people you have talked with are older people. I think it’smore a question of volume, i.e., how much money do they have. Rememberthe two and twenty—2 percent of the money is paid yearly? So they have bigsalaries and they get 20 percent of the profits. So it’s a pretty good deal, as Ithink I intimated the last time we talked. I think that that probably will bereduced to some degree, because it’s maybe too good a deal. But in any case, Ilike to put up my own money and my friends’ money, and we all share thegains, if any.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh is that really the way you do it? Lucas: Yes, and then I ask them for help, and we have fun, and we’ve beensuccessful. So it works for me, and it’s very satisfying to help the group go onto great success.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: In terms of the people that you invest with, do you chose investors accordingto the talents they have that they can then apply? Lucas: Not necessarily, they’re friends. Catch as catch can. Crawford Cooley investswith me to this day, and his son’s now also investing with me. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. Lucas: I really enjoy spending time with the executives and helping them. SometimesI have to fire them. But accomplishing things that haven’t been doneheretofore is super.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you like the hands-on. Lucas: I do! Oh yes, and I’m somewhat guilty. Guilty. Money is not the sole reason.It’s an important factor, but it’s not the only driving force. The driving force issuccess. One way to accomplish that is focus.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I know you’re telling me that that’s your motivation. But also, I would thinkthat you have a certain responsibility to your investors, even though they maybe friends. At least indirectly money has to be part of it, because they are notgoing to be too interested in continuing to invest through Don Lucas if— Lucas: If we lose, if we lose.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And you don’t want to lose either. Lucas: Of course not, no. No, I’m not a good loser. But in addition—I can’t think ofan exception—there are other people in professional venture capital firms thatare in these companies as well. So it’s just not me and my friends. When yougo on the board of a company, your obligations are to society, the otherinvestors, and also the officers and the employees. So you have multipleparties that you’re responsible to.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is becoming a board member always a condition of your investment? Lucas: Unless one of my friends is on the board. Well, that’s the way it’s worked. Ihaven’t thought of it in those terms. But yes, because I think I can add value.At least I think so. See, that’s the operative part.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Please give me a picture of the sorts of things that you might do as a boarddirector. Is there any kind of generic statement you can make? Or would yourather say, well, in the case of whatever, this is how I handled this particulardirectorship.  Lucas: I think there’s two ways to answer it. One is, as one with my background, Iobviously like numbers. And so in all cases, I have [to be] deeply involvedwith the numbers, and a lot of people aren’t particularly interested. So that’sfine, because typically I’ll work with the CFO or the chief accounting officer,or whatever the case may be. There’s lots of information in the numbers, andto pull that information out is important. And I do that even for verysubstantial companies.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because of your reputation in the field, do people look to you with theexpectation that that particular function is going to be yours? Looking at thenumbers and seeing if they add up? Lucas: Probably. If you’ve read the literature, a lot of committees have become moreimportant, you know, Sarbanes-Oxley and all. And I happen to be not asvociferously opposed to SOX as many people are because I do feel that wehave not properly accounted for the results. And so we collectively have anobligation to society. We had the accounting scandals re pricing of stockoptions, etc.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right, I remember. Lucas: And so we’re guilty. Collectively, we haven’t done a good job. So that [SOX]was imposed by the government. I don’t think that we were doing as good of ajob as we should have. Anyway, that’s just a fundamental, but there are manyother aspects. But the key thing that I focus on is the people. I told you before,I was a coach in some sports, and I’m older, obviously, and I have seen a lot.So often times I can help the team. So I try to help them where there may bedeficiencies in management—to help them bring that type of know-how to thecompany. Build a top team.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you have a network, probably regional, so that if they need bankingexpertise or whatever it might be, you would know exactly whom to contact? Lucas: I can’t say that specifically, no. It would be send the word out and send the netout and try to get the best we can. But no, I don’t have anything specific, andthat would not be right because I don’t want anyone to think I’m placing myfriends in their company. It’s their company; it’s not my company; it’s theircompany. But I’d like to help them.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I can see there that your long experience would be very valuable.  Lucas: But there are prerogatives—you know, the CEO is the boss! And so I try tohave a light touch. I’m not light by nature, but I try to be as light as I can,because I have no agenda other than for success. I do have one agenda whichis not to fail.That you are working, I guess, in every case with other venturecapitalists or whomever.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You have your style of doing venture investment, which I’m assuming is quitedifferent than the way many new firms— Lucas: Somewhat.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: —are doing it nowadays. And does that create a certain tension when you’retrying to work together on an enterprise? Lucas: Well, I would kind of put it the other way. If we have joined together, theypretty well know what they’re going to get from me. It’s been a process ofselection, adverse selection. They probably wouldn’t have participated,because they know what they’re going to get with me. I’m an open book.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] And you’re not going to budge either! Lucas: Well, I’m going to continue to try to do my best. That’s not to say I’m notgoing to budge. I’ve been wrong too many times, unfortunately.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I do want to talk about some failures. Lucas: No, I don’t want to talk about those. But one thing I do—you touched on it—is very interesting. I used to invest, as I told you previously, in New Englandbecause there’s that center up in Boston, and then I’ve been a very activechairman of the board in a company, HBO, in Atlanta, but I really have prettymuch, restricted myself to California.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But I saw some foreign companies on your bio. Lucas: Oh, I have two Chinese companies. I’m really slowly withdrawing from thosebecause I can’t be as active as I want to be. And I can’t do as good a job as I’dlike to do because there are certain local customs that I obviously have noknowledge of. 40<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why did you get involved in the first place? Lucas: Well, they asked me to, and I thought I could help them. I keep learning, evenat this advanced age, that the closer geographically suits my temperamentbetter. And I think I can call on—what you were alluding to—the network. Ihave a better network here; I don’t have any kind of a network in China.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Geographic proximity seems a sine qua non for somebody like you who wantsa hands-on style of dealing with a company—unless you’re willing to be onan airplane most of your life. Lucas: Or to be somewhat arrogant, and I am losing that. After some mistakes youlose that; you don’t quite have the same arrogance.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you consider that you were arrogant at certain stages of your life? Lucas: Oh I’m certainly— Some people probably think I’m arrogant now. There’s adifference between being right and being arrogant, and I probably wasoverarching or whatever you want to call it, pushy, whatever.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Would another word be overconfident? Lucas: Of course. All those words! [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, let’s pick up the chronological thread, if you think that’s the way to go.You’re now out of Draper— Lucas: Gaither & Anderson.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You end up with Crawford [Cooley] in an office on Sand Hill Road, and thenwhat? Lucas: We had some continuing associations. For example, DG&A had sold Tracor,in Austin, Texas, a number of companies—I believe three. So I was on theboard down there, and I was Don Lucas from California. You know theTexans, you know the Texans—these are real Texans, but I love them. Thecompany was around $20 million-$30 million in revenues. We ended up around $1.5 billion. And it was just a marvelous experience. There were anumber of people involved who were very talented in finance, so I learnedfrom them—a CPA and a lawyer and an investment banker. So that was agreat experience for me, so I continued on that board of directors for a longtime.And there are some other ongoing relationships. We made some additionalinvestments as we went along. We moved up to 3000 Sand Hill Rd., MenloPark, when this building was built. I participated with the developer of thiscomplex. I’ve been here, of course, ever since. And then B.J. Cassin came in.And so he and Crawford moved here.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you consider these people partners? Lucas: They were not partners.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What were they? Lucas: Real good friends.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And that remains so. Lucas: Yes, to this day.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So it’s always been Don Lucas. Lucas: Well, no, it’s not Don Lucas. It’s us.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But it’s very different than the way I understand most venture capital firms. Lucas: Yes, we’re not a firm. We’re individuals.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see that. And that’s why you’re called iconoclastic. Lucas: Well, I don’t know what that word means. It’s too complicated for me.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] It seems to me that you’re a flashback to the older style—well,that’s not even true, either.  Lucas: No, I don’t think there was an older style. There was no older style.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I was thinking of the Rockefellers, et cetera. But on the other hand, theyhad no contact with the companies they were investing in, so that’s not amodel. Lucas: No. I set off by myself because—and maybe I didn’t fully answer that firstquestion. [pause] If you help out, you should make money. But everybodyfeels that way about themselves, so there’s some tension. So I just don’t haveany tension.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You didn’t want the tension. Lucas: I didn’t want any tension. And it’s not arrogance!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I have to take from that—and you correct me if I’m wrong—that there hadbeen some tension. Lucas: Oh sure, sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You get a bunch of power-wielding men, and it seems to me that— Lucas: If you get a bunch of men they’re going to argue; they’re going to fight.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] And particularly over money. Lucas: Particularly over money.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Money or women. Lucas: Oh, we didn’t have any women problems to my knowledge.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] I didn’t mean in that particular case. Lucas: We did have disagreements just like anybody, but it wasn’t— Well, it waswhatever it was. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Say something, please, about what goes through your mind when you firstlearn of a new opportunity. Maybe my question is, how do you learn ofthings? Lucas: Okay. Because founders look for people with money, that’s real easy. That’swhy they come.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So they come to you. Lucas: But some people just want money and nothing else, and we don’t want to dothat, so they’re disqualified. But I can just go over one, and this is not atypical, but it’s a little bit at theextreme. So I’m sitting in the conference room here, and I get a call from agood friend of mine who is the chief economist at J.P. Morgan, John Lipsky,and now he’s the number two guy at the IMF [International Monetary Fund].He’s an economist, and I was chairman of, as I told you, the Stanford Institutefor Economic Policy Research, SIEPR. He was on the board of SIEPR, andwe got to know each other. I’m a great admirer of his, and he’s a really smartPhD economist and all that. My assistant said I had a call from Beijing. “Of course I’ll take the call.” Hesaid, “You’ve got to meet this young lady [Elizabeth Holmes]!” I said, “John,what?” “You’ve got to meet her; she’s fabulous.” “Okay.” I’m figuring twentyminutes, right? This young lady comes in; I think she probably was twentyone years old at the time and had left Stanford, didn’t graduate, and she had acompany called Theran. And I thought this was going to be a shortconversation. Well, now I’m chairman of the board and spend a lot of timewith her and the company and she’s doing super! She had some other investors, but she was looking for help and money; maybemore money then help. But anyway, she got both whether she wanted it ornot! So she’s in the area of helping drug companies develop new drugs moreefficiently and has some really exciting technology. And so instead of twentyminutes, we spent two or three hours talking. So I got interested, raised somemoney, became chairman as I said, and we’re still at it. And the company’sgrowing quite rapidly and successfully. We’ve gone through the kind ofproblems you’d imagine. Lucas: She had no background in business, and so it’s quite presumptuous forsomebody to say, “I’m going to be president of the company.” But there’s animportant distinction. That’s what I felt when I [first] met her. After spendinga lot more time with her. I learned her great-grandfather was an entrepreneurand started Fleischmann’s – packaged yeast. It was very successful. So that was one side, that’s the entrepreneur side, but she was in the medical side. Ah!It turns out later, the hospital very near where they lived is named after hergreat uncle who was involved with medicine. So she came by both of the twotalents necessary here, one medicine and the other entrepreneurship, quitenaturally. You could just see it the way she handles things, the way she thinks.And so obviously I think she needed help. I think that’s a fairly typicalsituation.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, typical and not typical. I don’t imagine too many twenty-one-year-oldwomen are starting companies. Lucas: No, but the basic ingredients are there.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I can understand that. But say something about what she might have run upagainst just because of her age and maybe even her gender. Were there anyextra hurdles that she had to leap? Lucas: Oh, there are advantages. She was attractive, too. [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I can imagine people saying what does this twenty-one-year old know aboutanything? Lucas: Well, she’s really smart. That’s very apparent. She’s really smart about thisbusiness.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But as you were implying, she didn’t know anything about running acompany. Lucas: I didn’t mean to say she didn’t know anything. I said she had a lot to learn.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I put it too extremely. Lucas: You know, it didn’t occur to me.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Does a woman entrepreneur in the world that you know have an equalopportunity to a man starting out in a business? Have you observed any— Lucas: Bias. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Any bias. Lucas: The answer is no, but that doesn’t prove much. We’ve had some strong femaleexecutives, like at Oracle we’ve got a co-president, Safra Katz, who is femaleobviously, and she’s fabulous. She used to work downstairs here for DrexelBurnham [Lambert]. Nothing stopped her, and she’s one of the top fifteen,ten, whatever, in America. So it’s not been my experience.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Good! Lucas: Well, I had a strong mom and I’m indebted to her. So maybe there’s a positivebias, not a negative bias! [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now, of all the people that she could have chosen to come to for money, whydid she choose you? Lucas: Well, I think she talked to John. I’ve never questioned it. You know, whenyou need money, you go most anyplace.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because you take a very hands-on approach, maybe John realized that shewould need your hands-on experience. Lucas: I think so, I think so. But I also made it very clear, that’s the way I operate.But I really have just noticed that there’s not a lot of top female executivesand CEOs.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why is that? Lucas: I don’t know.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What about women in venture capital? Lucas: There’s been a couple; not terribly successful as a whole.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is there anything to be said about a general kind of personality that goes alongwith venture capital? Lucas: Well, I would define it differently than maybe some of the people. See,they’re executives of the firms now. There’s a lot of money to invest, and they have to be executives. You’ve got a lot of people working for them, et cetera,et cetera. But see to me, venture capital is about helping the companiesprosper, and it’s not about the management side of the money, if you will. So Ireally look at it person-to-person as opposed to organization-to-organization. Idon’t know whether that explains it?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you feel that that’s not the way most venture capitalists go about it? Lucas: Yes. I’m going to get personally involved, and I think they’re more detached.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yet there are people that have a reputation for getting personally involved. Ithink of Tom Perkins, for example. Lucas: Well, Tom used to work for me in a company, and I know Tom pretty well.And I don’t think he’s an exception.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Really? Lucas: Yes. I’m a great admirer of Tom.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because he has a hands-on approach? Lucas: He founded a great firm, Kleiner Perkins, and Gene Kleiner and Tom—Gene’s dead and Tom’s gone on to other things. But they’ve done a wonderfuljob, it’s a great firm. It is probably the outstanding firm.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why? Lucas: I know several of the people there now, and it’s a fine firm, lots of money, lotsof success.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is that what you look at when you say it’s a successful firm? That it makesmoney? Lucas: No, no. That they have had successful companies from incubation to maturity.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see, going back to what you think is central.  Lucas: And that’s success. If you’re good at building something that’s important andbig and profitable, then it’s going to have made you a lot of money. It’s theother way around; it’s not the money, it’s the end result.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, you’re being very consistent in your philosophy. [laughter] Lucas: I hope!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I know Tom Perkins came out of technology. He had been director of—whatwas it, the computer division? Lucas: At HP.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, at HP. Lucas: He’s smart, charming, an outstanding person.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What I was trying to get to is, you make it very clear that you come from afinancial standpoint. Lucas: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Not from a technological standpoint, and Tom does have the technicalbackground and management. Lucas: All.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh really? Lucas: Not necessarily finance. Most people think you can hire finance, right? Buthe’s got it all. He understood marketing, selling, technology, so he was wellrounded.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because of his other HP experiences. Lucas: And HP is one of the great companies. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, has [lack of a technical background] ever been a detriment for you? Thefact that you’re great on the numbers— Lucas: I think it’s been an asset. I don’t argue with them about technology.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Can you really judge a company in terms of just its people and its finances? Lucas: I go get the experts.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Okay. So it’s not as though you’re investing, having no idea about what thetechnology’s about. Lucas: No, no, no. I’ve got a lot of good friends, whether they come from Stanford orBerkeley, etc.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So is that what you do? Did you do that, for example, with the young woman?You talked to her, you were impressed, but then you picked up the phone? Lucas: Sure, sure. Well, we have the Lucas Imaging Center at Stanford. So I talked toGary [M.] Glazer who runs it. We probably have the number-one imagingcenter in the world! So I said, “Gary, what about this idea?” “Well—.” Andthen I’ve got some friends at Mayo; I helped Mayo sell their hotel chain. Theywere going to lose a lot of money. They ended up making a fair amount. Andso they have helped me. And so I reach out to other people. And so I considerthat an advantage, actually, because I don’t know.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, but you see how important the network is to you, and vice-versa. Lucas: Absolutely. And so I nurture that by inclusion—do you want to invest withus? Or maybe, like at Stanford, give them money, or whatever.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It sounds very satisfying. I like the idea that it’s about people. Lucas: It is. I do too. It makes it easy.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Should we talk about specific companies? How about picking out one?  Lucas: I don’t know what you’re trying to get at.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I’m trying to get at—lessons is a heavy word—but principles thatillustrate how you go about it. What you’re thinking about in dealing withother people’s money and yours in an entrepreneurial situation—illustrationsof your philosophy. Lucas: Oracle would be the easiest, because it’s a big successful company andeveryone knows about it. How I got involved with Oracle early—they startedout downstairs in this building.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] That’s pretty convenient. Lucas: That’s very convenient.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Does that mean that you have an incubator? Lucas: No, no. They rented some space downstairs.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Okay. It’s as simple as that. I didn’t know them from Adam. So I have to goupstairs to my office, and so I’d see the lights on. I tend to work long hoursand come in at odd hours—they’re always there at night! So I went to theiroffice and asked, “What the heck do you guys do?” “Oh we make relationaldatabases.” And of course, that pffft—right over my head! I said, “Oh really!”And they had a very attractive graduate at Stanford, a gal who was thereceptionist, who Larry [Ellison] later married. And they were dressed likethey did in those days, hippies.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And when was this? Lucas: In ’78-’79, something like that. And so then they asked me, “Oh we’ve gotthis problem of evaluating the stock.” Larry barely knew what stock was. SoI helped him, and he said, “Well, what about being a director?” “Okay.”“Well, how about being the chairman?” I said, “Okay.” And that’s how itstarted. It was that simple. So they clearly were doing well. They were makingmoney from the start.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Just out of those offices down there? 50 Lucas: Yes, and then, of course, they moved out soon—more space, et cetera. Andthey didn’t need any money; they needed business—somebody who knew alittle bit about business and about finance.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why didn’t they need money? They had venture capital backing? Lucas: They really didn’t need VC capital. They were profitable and generated theirown capital.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh I see! Lucas: They took this technology, this technology that was what IBM developeddown at Santa Teresa, and commercialized it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Had Ellison been at IBM? Lucas: No. He spotted a good idea and he commercialized it. That’s the end of thestory. But it is pretty unusual in that respect. The point is that they hadexcellent technology, and they hired great people, got them to focus onsuccess. And they were profitable and did all the right things. Oracle raisedsome money, before they went public, from venture capital, but it reallywasn’t needed.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How soon did Oracle go public? Lucas: It was about eight or nine years, something like that. We went public the sametime as Microsoft did, the same year.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I want to hear about that too. Lucas: There’s no story.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, there is to me in a general sense, in that I would like you to saysomething about how you figure out when it is time for a company to gopublic. Lucas: Yes, okay, just let’s get through that, because it’s really pretty straightforward.If you have something that’s fundamentally cutting-edge, leading, that people, industry, government want, hat you can sell at a profit, and it looks like it willbe able to grow significantly, like to $100 million-$500 million or larger,that’s the sort of thing. And management has the courage to put up with thepublic, which is a real big deal, then you should go public. Right now we havea hiatus on public offerings, which is a totally separate subject.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because of the recession. Lucas: Because of the financial discombobulation, yes. Some people think it’smore—I tend not to. But we have had a dearth of IPOs, which I think is badfor society as a whole. It’s certainly bad for the financial side. It’s certainlybad for the venture capitalists. But I think if you have these rudimentary necessities and the opportunity forthe investors to make a lot of money, then an IPO is appropriate. Now if youdon’t have those things, or don’t have those ambitions, then you shouldn’t gopublic! A lot of people go public to try to get liquidity for their stock, for theirstockholders. That’s not the reason to do it; it’s not for liquidity. The reasonfor it is to obtain growth capital and that you have significant financial growthahead.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Presumably somewhere in there, the climate of the stock market is going tofigure in. You’re implying that right now is not a very good time, even if youhave everything else. Lucas: But some companies just went public. Grand Canyon. One of my friends herejust took Grand Canyon public, an educational-type company. But this is moreof a debate which I don’t think may be appropriate for this. If you’ve got thosefundamental requirements, you can go public. That’s my position. And youshould go public if you want it—if you want the public ownership and needthe money.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: The fact that your co-investors are your friends, who, I presume, yes theywant their money out, but they wouldn’t be dealing with you unless theytrusted you at a certain level. So I imagine that the pressure for you to producereturns is probably a little bit less than it would be if it were an anonymouspool of limited partners who maybe could care less about the company. Theyjust want their money out, and they want it out in a reasonable amount oftime. Lucas: There’s a couple of interesting points here. One, I just want to help you onthis—going public isn’t the only route to liquidity. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I know that. Lucas: So you can sell the company.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, you can. Lucas: So selling a company gives you total liquidity. That’s real liquidity. And wedid that at Draper, Gaither & Anderson. We had a company and we neededsome cash. Remember I told you about our bank problem. Pete negotiated itactually, or maybe this was Crawford, I guess. Yes, Crawford. The president,was Allan Simpkins, he sold Delcon to HP for— We got a couple milliondollars in stock. So in many respects, that’s better than a public offering.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see that. Lucas: Because when you have an IPO you have to wait, and it’s only partialliquidity. You get a quote, but that doesn’t mean you can sell all your stocktomorrow.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: When a company is acquired, do you then wash your hands of it? Lucas: Well, I’ve already touched on this. For the most part, when we have sold acompany, it’s theirs. Now in the case of Tracor, which I mentioned to you, wehad sold them a number of companies, and I went on the board, and so it’s alittle bit different.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Okay, another area that we haven’t talked about— Do you invest in privatecompanies with the idea that eventually they’re going to be acquired or gopublic? Or is there some set of advantages to having a company remainprivate? Lucas: [Sigh] Well, you don’t realize how many buttons you’ve touched. Let’s just get through the reporting. As far as I’m concerned, once you start acompany, you want to be prepared to have a public company and have thecapability to report just as if you were a public company, i.e., SEC and SOX,et cetera. So I don’t look on it any differently. I want to have auditors auditingthe books. Some people don’t believe in that. I think it’s wrong not to do itthat way. You want to have that rigor, whether it’s public or private or whatever your objectives are. Some people differ with that. I don’t. So as faras the technical requirements, it makes no difference.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: This is a naïve question, but Sarbanes-Oxley applies only to publiccompanies? Lucas: Well, that’s a little complicated. In this respect, the government only hasauthority over public companies. But if you want to be public, you want to beable to comply with Sarbanes-Oxley. You can’t do that instantly, so it’s betterto practice from the beginning. And, my position is further than that—youwant to do things right in any case. So Sarbanes-Oxley doesn’t really pose aburden to me. You have a few additional requirements, but not substantive.You want your books to be right. Okay, let’s go back to the public/private. I hadn’t thought of it that way, butwe do not contemplate keeping the company private. We don’t invest with theidea of keeping it private. I don’t believe we’ve ever had a case of that. Butwhether or not it may be acquired or sold or IPO, we don’t look at itdifferently, we don’t look at that. We’re just looking for growth, success,profit, things like that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So there would be nothing that you would— Lucas: Do differently.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Just anecdotally—Sally reading the New York Times business section--acquisitions seem to be such the thing these days. First of all, am I right aboutthat? And secondly, if I am, is there a particular reason why acquisitions forlegal or monetary or whatever reasons seem to be prevalent? Lucas: [chuckling] You don’t realize what a big question that is. If you’ve got a weekor two, bring your cot. [<|endoftext|>
Interviewer chuckles] Well, we’re in techland here, right?Silicon Valley. And so, it was easy to start companies here. It didn’t take a lotof money; it took some good ideas, et cetera. There are more companies thanare economic, so they should consolidate because you have the economies ofscale. See, that’s what we’ve done at Oracle. We’ve made, I don’t know howmany acquisitions, fifty, sixty, quite a few. We did the same thing at Tracor,the same with a number of other companies, i.e., Cadence.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Fifty or sixty acquisitions?  Lucas: Yes. Nothing unique about that. But the thing is, people don’t fully understandthis, and many business people don’t, unless you’ve experienced theeconomies of scale, you don’t realize it. Like when Oracle bought PeopleSoftand people said, “Oh, it won’t work,” et cetera. When you brought the twocompanies together, you have the opportunities to cross-sell products to eachothers’ customers. We can sell them a database, right? And we had some appsto go along with their apps, and so cross-sell, up-sell, down-sell, et cetera. Soyou had a broader set of related products to sell people.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And that was what was firing the acquisitions? Lucas: Yes, and you only need one CFO; there’s not two CFOs, so you have theoperating economies of scale. And it worked just like the textbooks said itwould, and it was amazing. We’ve been doing this, as I say, for a long time,so there’s nothing new as far as “consolidation” goes. So, there’s theadvantage of scale. It’s happened in the car industry, it’s happened in thechemical industry, it happens in the steel industry. There’s nothing uniqueabout it. So there’s been a quite a number of acquisitions in this area, SiliconValley, because? Maturity.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Ah, it makes sense. Lucas: Yes. Nothing very complicated about it. And so there’s nothing magical aboutit. It does lead to more economic conglomerations and to, of course, somemistakes too. No question about that. So it’s a natural business evolutionarystep, so there’s nothing magical.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Give me an idea of what might go wrong—that the selling pattern that youenvisioned doesn’t materialize? Lucas: We go back to people. If you buy a hollow company, [if] the people whomade the company, like PeopleSoft, the technologists, the software engineers,et cetera, if they all leave, you’ve bought an empty bag. You don’t haveanything to cross-sell, up-sell. You’ve just got a bunch of overhead. Am Igetting through?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, I see. Lucas: The culture has to be compatible and things like that. So it’s not automatic,and there’s many examples of acquisitions that have failed. But I wouldsuggest one of the key ones is incompatibility of the key people. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: We’d better stop for a minute [for a tape change]. Lucas: Okay. We’re stopping. But did you get that?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, I did get that. Culture actually was going to be one of my questions. AmI driving you nuts with my naïve questions? Lucas: No, no! They’re good questions. They’re not naïve.[End Audio File 3]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All right. So we’re on the second tape. I think I probably know the answer tothe question of what you consider your greatest strength, but I’d still like youto say it. Lucas: Well, I’m open. And there are lots of things I don’t know, particularly when itcomes to technology, et cetera. So I cannot say to you in one word sort ofthing. But as I’ve said before, I think the most important thing is I invest inpeople, and I try to help people achieve the objective. And that’s thebeginning and the end.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, that’s what I thought you were going to say. Lucas: Yes, I know it is. [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I do get the theme! Lucas: Very simple.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, you, I think facetiously, said you didn’t want to talk about failures. But Ithink it would be instructive if you picked one that might be illustrative ofhow things can go wrong. Lucas: Okay. We try to excise those from our minds because if we thought aboutthem too much, we wouldn’t be able to go forward. My gracious! Well, we had this one venture—I even forget the name of it. It was in patient medicalrecords. And this maybe was ten, fifteen years ago. And Kaiser Health [Plan][million]-$15 [million] of our money, and it was a total failure. Sometechnicians from San Diego were involved, and a good friend of mine was aleader in it from the venture capital side. Why was it a failure? We were trying to change people’s way of doingsomething, and that’s really tough—particularly when they’re as arrogant asthe doctors. I was just over having my eyes checked by the head ofophthalmology at Stanford, and she was complaining about her medicalrecords. She couldn’t find my medical records. But they had a committeechasing this, and I said, “You should be on the committee. Because this isreally important.” But the medical record problem has not been solved, andit’s very difficult. However, I think it will be solved because the doctors havebecome more technically literate.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I thought Kaiser had everything online. Lucas: This was pre. I don’t know what their situation is exactly. But to get a medicalrecord, it takes everybody, all the participants—the nurses, the docs, theinstitution, the patient—all have to play a part. But we were too early.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, but you go back to the people. It’s still people. Lucas: Yes, oh of course.Norton: We have a Kaiser series of interviews, and there is some discussion of thiswhole thing in that series. Lucas: I think the company was up here. I’ve talked to the Kaiser head of IT; they’remajor customers of Oracle. We’ve chuckled about it, but we’ve all mademistakes. Medical records are a real problem. President Obama is planning tohave the government spend a lot of money in this area, and I’m very hopefulbecause it’s very important. We thought it was important then, and we stillthink it’s important, but it’s tough.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You act more independently than I picture most venture capitalists operating.What does that mean in terms of your relationships with those venturecapitalists when you’re in a deal together? Or does it make any differencewhatsoever?  Lucas: I have a lot of good friends in venture capital. It’s not a question of arroganceor superiority or anything like that on my part. It’s just that this is the way Ilike to practice. And as I say, I’ve been with many of them as co-investors.We’ve had differences of opinion, but they’ve all worked out satisfactorily, Imean good, so I’m not being cagey about it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I’m sure your record of success has a lot to do with it too. How can you arguewith success? Lucas: Yes, well.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, shall we move to the larger context? Do you care to say anything aboutchanges at the Washington level that might have had direct impact on whatyou were doing? We mentioned Sarbanes-Oxley, and you said you’d alreadybeen doing that. Lucas: It’s incidental.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: There were things [federal legislation] happening in the late seventies thatfreed up pension money. Did you care? Lucas: That doesn’t affect me [pause to think]. To the extent there’s a viable financialsystem—we were close to not being very viable here. That’s the only thingthat would impact what we do.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You put that in the past. Lucas: Yes! America is through the most troublesome period, and we are on the wayup. It still is not apparent from the numbers, but we can see the way out of thismorass.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What are you looking at if not the numbers? Lucas: Well, I’m looking at the numbers, but they always speak different things todifferent people.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] That’s another theme!  Lucas: I’m not an economist, but we just had this summit meeting at the StanfordInstitute for Economic Policy Research, in which we start at 8:00 and we gotill like 9:00 at night. And 500 people and some great economists—and it wasreally thrilling. We had Condi Rice start off the day, and it was marvelous.Some tears trickled down my face. I was truly thrilled. She was a friend. Iknew her before she went to Washington. It was just a wonderful, wonderfulinspirational talk on how she’s interested in children and education and allthese things. It was just wonderful. But then we got into the hardcore economic finance topics, and we had anumber of discussions. One session was Abby Joseph Cohen, from GoldmanSachs; she has been their guru in stock picking, and Dr. Michael [J.] Boskin,who happens to be a good friend of mine. He was chairman of the Counsel ofEconomic Advisors for the elder Bush, and he’s very bright. They really gotinto it. And then concluding was the chairman of Wells Fargo, DickKovacevich, who was quite outspoken and said he wished he’d never takenmoney from the government. And he didn’t want any control [by] thegovernment of his bank, et cetera. It was great to hear. They’re going to payoff the U. S. Government loan as soon as they can, which is great andappropriate. So you know, listening and reading beforehand and subsequently—theeconomy had some very serious problems. We had 1 percent interest for waytoo long a period of time, and we had a goal for our country started byPresident Clinton, continued by President Bush: everybody should have ahome, literally. And as a result, and Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae, et cetera,too many people bought homes they couldn’t afford. And so there was anatural increase in demand, which shot prices up, and many people,unfortunately, that shouldn’t have bought homes. They had mortgages whichwere not going to be paid off. And these executives defaulted mortgagesmainly in our system, as well as the rest of the world, and these are reallytoxic assets.Yesterday, we finally got [Timothy] Geithner’s plan on how to,hopefully, get these bad mortgages out of the banking system and off to theside so the banks can go about their job of lending.But this was a very traumatic period: the banks stopped lending, and it was acrisis. So that’s why I spoke in the past tense. We know what the problem is;we’re doing something about it; we will solve it if we haven’t solved it. The stimulus is debatable, et cetera, and so I won’t get into that. But there’sgoing to be adequate stimulus, and so the economy will recover—humaninstincts sort of thing. If you don’t know what the problem is, you can’t solveit. But when you know what the problem is, even if it’s a big problem, adifficult problem, it will be done. We’ve got some great minds working on it,and we’re making great progress, so that’s why I put it in the past tense. I didn’t know anything about this mortgage business. I’m just shocked at whathappened—the mortgages that shouldn’t be given to the people, thefalsification, all that stuff. It is a disaster.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What about the due diligence and social responsibility you talked about? Lucas: The whole thing was a terrible mistake. The motive was good, but theexecution was poor.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I couldn’t help thinking as you were talking about how important you felt it tokeep the books right and also to be responsible to society. That’s not whatwe’ve been seeing, is it? Lucas: No. It’s very sad. The powers that be were complicit. The government in itsvarious arms was complicit. But I’m very optimistic.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, you sound that. But I think that’s your nature. Lucas: Oh yes, it is my nature. [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I would like your thoughts on this particular region, Northern California andspecifically Silicon Valley, being the background against which much ofventure capital has happened in this country. Lucas: Oh yes, that’s a subject that I’m fond of talking about. I come from SouthernCalifornia; I come from Ontario. And my brother got degrees at Berkeley; hisundergraduate at Davis, his master’s and his doctor’s at UCLA, he started atthe Max Planck Institute in Berlin. He instantly became the number two guyat Jet Propulsion Lab at Caltech. I mean to say, some of the smartest peoplethat we’ve had in technology have come from Caltech. I don’t want people tobe confused that we think we’re special in California. And of course, CMU[Carnegie Mellon University], MIT, up in Boston, and others are quitecompetent. California is a great place to live. I don’t think anybody can disagree with that.So it’s easy to recruit people to work here. And we have, this is my view, theSpanish heritage. That’s a welcoming sort of heritage, and we were broughtup that way, Californians were. So I think we assimilate others naturally,easily, don’t even think twice about it. That’s my impression. It hasn’t comeup, but where you come from, really, or where we’re going to have theoperations—we’re very flexible. As you know, we now have, many of our 60more people-intensive businesses are in India and China. They’ve gotten morepeople and they are less expensive so we naturally look that direction. And then we’ve been very fortunate to have great universities right here, suchas Berkeley and Stanford. And we do have a different way of looking attechnology. Like at the universities, it’s not the ideas—they’re not owned bythe university, they’re owned by the individuals. Now the university may getroyalties, et cetera, depending on the arrangement. I’m saying this as opposedto some Eastern schools that are not as open.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Have you seen that yourself? Lucas: Oh yes. And more willing to try. Like at National [Semiconductor] we copiedwhat Sperry Rand was doing. The guys came from Sperry Rand, and ourdoors got locked because we cheated. We came out here and came acrosssome engineers who wanted to make new semiconductors with differenttechnology, and we supported them, and we developed an outstandingcompany! Isn’t it amazing? And the people came from all over; from Europe,Israel, Eastern United States, China—a lot of Chinese scientists havecontributed a great deal. It’s an open society.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It’s another melting pot, a technological melting pot! Lucas: Yes, it is. There’s not the prejudice—I’ve not seen the prejudices. And Icertainly hope I don’t practice them of any kind, because who’s to say who’sbetter and who’s not. We try to get the best. We had some great leaders. I was fortunate enough to know both DavePackard and Bill Hewlett. And HP is a great role model, of course, likeStanford, et cetera. But they were great. Ethical, hard-working, cutting-edge,quality, high-profit margins.I touched on something that’s, I think, kind of interesting. I come fromSouthern California, obviously, and there is a difference: we had more theaerospace industry in Southern California, more government-supported, fixedprofits and less risk—and did a wonderful job—the space vehicles and theemployers, all that sort of thing. But up here it is typically proprietary, cuttingedge, high-profit-margin products. So I think that the very fundamentals uphere were of a different character.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That’s an interesting observation. I hadn’t heard that before. And more room,I would think, for venture capital investment.  Lucas: More opportunities, not room, but more opportunities. Absolutely because—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, well, I’m thinking that the government was funding JPL and places likethat. Lucas: Yes. Tracor was government. We did a lot of work for the government, so youcan make money working, obviously, for the government. But here we getproprietary. And it just, of course, boomed. With Dr. [William B.] Shockleycoming out here, bringing his seven or eight other engineers from Bell Labs,just discovering a new way of making semiconductors.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Once the ball gets rolling, to use a bad cliché, then other bright minds that aresimilarly oriented are attracted. So it’s almost as though once you get themagnetism going, it’s going to take on a life of its own]. And then you’ve gotall of these other things in the environment, the research universities, and thebeautiful climate. Lucas: And plenty of room, physically, physically. So what is it that we didn’t have?We had everything to offer. We had a great country, we have a free enterprisesystem, and we’re a great part of a great country. I won’t say we’re the bestpart.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Arguably one of the most entrepreneurial. Lucas: But see that was what brought the people in—society was supporting theentrepreneur. See, it’s the people, and this was attractive. Now, I had a placeup at Jackson Hole, a wonderful place, but it’s kind of hard to live year round.It’s kind of hard to move around three or four months of the year.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: We’ve got five minutes. Please compare the second center of venture capital,namely that around Boston, Cambridge, route 128, all that. How is it or is itnot different, culturally or however you want to phrase it, from what youexperienced in Silicon Valley? Lucas: Well, as I told you earlier, I was involved with a number of companies in bothplaces. One is, the Boston area has a relatively much more rigid socialstructure. If you didn’t sign the Declaration of Independence, you’re nobody.My forbears came over from Europe, and we raised Belgian horses in Iowa,for goodness sakes, and then came out here, and there was land, and we tilledthe land. So it’s more open. Easier to develop new things. I have some wonderful friends back there, and I love it, and I have greatadmiration for their institutions and the cities and their culture, et cetera. Thatholds them back! We had nothing. There was no culture to be changed. It wasopen, fresh air, and make what you can of it. And fortunately, we had somepeople that came before me who just have done wonders.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What about tolerance for failure? Lucas: I don’t detect that being different. I think it’s more the social structure. Itwasn’t the thing to do. The thing to do here is to start a company, right? That’swhat these kids are doing, this Internet stuff. I don’t have a clue what they’redoing, but that’s the thing to do.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It used to be that you went into your father’s company. Lucas: And they had great companies and they’re great people. Here we just had awide-open opportunity. We had everything. We got the money from the East;the brains from the world would come here, right? And it’s a great place tolive. What more do you want? We’ve got it all! That’s called California. Sowe hope it stays that way.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I think we should probably stop there. Lucas: Great. Thank you. It’s been fun talking to you, Sally,<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I can’t tell you how much I’ve enjoyed learning from you. Lucas: Oh geez! Some people would really question your sanity if you say things likethat. 
Interviewer: It’s July 21, 2009, and I’m in the office of [J.] Burgess Jamieson at 3000 SandHill Road, which is an iconic address in venture capital. Linda suggested that Isay something briefly about the genesis of this project. We have to credit Pete Bancroft; he had the idea and he agreed to provide thefunding for the first three years. Jamieson: Oh, that’s very generous.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, it is very generous. We have an advisory board of people that youprobably know—Pete Bancroft, Bill Draper, Pitch Johnson, Alan [C.]Mendelson, Jerome Engle, and Charles Faulhaber, who is the director of theBancroft Library, where this project resides. The idea was to start at the beginning, namely with the first generation ofventure capitalists who were actually called that. I’m aware from talking topeople that there were people doing risk investment before that, but it wasn’tcalled venture capital. The board has selected a number of people in that firstgeneration for interviews. So with that, let’s begin. Would you say on-tape what you just said to Lindaand me? Jamieson: Oh, yes, what I said was that I’ve had a terrible time with name memory formy whole career, but my numeric memory is excellent. I said that if peoplehad numbers, I’d have no problems at all! Some CEOs have found out, to theirdismay, that my memory for numbers is very good! [laughter] Better than theywish it were!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, what we’re going to do now is to start at the beginning, namely withyour parents and your upbringing and your education and just roughly movethrough time. In your case, I think it’s interesting that it will take us a while toget to venture capital. Jamieson: Yes. It took me a while to get there, but I’m slow at most things.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I know you were born in Nassau County, New York. Jamieson: Right. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Into what kind of a family? Jamieson: Well, I’ve never had the courage to ask my parents how they felt when I wasborn, because I was conceived before the crash of 1929, and I appeared in1930, and I know their circumstances were very different between those twotimes. But my father’s career evolved into being a builder. He was in thelumber business before the Depression, and I think he lost his job in around1932. He had a number of miscellaneous jobs, which I don’t remember, for anumber of years. My mother had been a secretary, and she worked at AT&T in the patentdepartment. They had a secretarial pool, and one of the patent attorneys wasof German ancestry and had a terrible accent, so the rest of the pool membersdreaded having to take dictation from him. But my mother’s background wasGerman and she understood the language, so she was his favorite. From that,she went on to another, smaller I think, sales division of a larger company andworked there until my parents were married in 1928. She went back to work in 1937 to accumulate enough capital for my father tostart his own business, which he did. His father and my uncle were bothbuilders, and the family history, in that side of the family for years, had beenin the construction and building business. And so he wanted to start his ownbuilding firm, which he did in 1939 as a result of my mother going back towork.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That was quite a contribution. Jamieson: Yes, it was. And she was his bookkeeper for most of the time he was in thebusiness.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was this residential building? Jamieson: Residential—well, it was except during the war when he built commercialbuildings that were part of the war supply situation.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you have brothers and sisters? Jamieson: I have a sister who is a year-and-a-half younger than I am.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So it was hard times for a while, it sounds.  Jamieson: Oh, very hard, very hard, yes. I remember one Christmas I was told I couldhave just one present, and it couldn’t cost more than a dollar. But we alwayshad a tree and decorations.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What kind of a household was it? What was the discipline like? Jamieson: Well, not very comparable to anything today. I have to say it was fairly strict.I don’t have any memories of being unfairly treated. It’s just that our wholelifestyle was much simpler than it is today. For instance, I don’t think we hadenough money to have a telephone until my mother went back to work. Andwe lived with my grandmother.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you have a car? Jamieson: Oh yes, we had a car.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Living with your grandmother was a way to save money, presumably. Jamieson: Actually, her house was on the market. My father built a spec house—that is,a house that was built to sell—and their plan was whichever house sold first,they would sell, and live in whichever one that was left. Of course, that wasmy grandmother’s. So that’s how we wound up there.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You went to public schools? Jamieson: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And right there in Nassau County? Jamieson: Yes. Our grammar school and high school both happened to be in our town,although I had probably about a two-mile walk to high school, but I walked.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You didn’t have your own car. [chuckling] Jamieson: No, I didn’t have my own car.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I figured. Were you getting interested in any particular discipline?  Jamieson: Yes. A very interesting thing happened that shaped my whole life for quite awhile was that when I was nine years old I built a one-tube radio and itworked. And from then on I wanted nothing other than to be an electricalengineer. Never gave a second thought to anything else.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What’s a one-tube radio? Jamieson: Everything in those days was tubes. There were no transistors or integratedcircuits.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I’ve heard other people who ended up in technical careers say so often theradio was what got them interested. Jamieson: Well, my next move in that direction, before I went to college, was I tookelectronics courses in high school. We had them. I got a FCC First ClassRadiotelephone Operator License when I was sixteen, which was aninteresting experience because I had to go to the FCC headquarters in NewYork City with a room full of people taking the examination. Most of thepeople there were in their thirties and forties, and of course I got a lot of notvery pleasant looks. But I passed, and as a result of that I was able to get a jobwhen I was sixteen being a night operator at an FM station, and that was thebest-paying job I had till I got out of college.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And you probably liked it as well. Jamieson: Oh, it was great. I could do my homework. I just had to check the transmitterevery half hour or so, although once in a while I would fill in as atranscription turntable operator, whatever.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You obviously did well in high school, because your biography says you weresecond in a class of about 800. Jamieson: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you being encouraged in the way of education by your parents? Wasthat something that was expected of you? To do well in school? Jamieson: I think they were pleased when I did do well, and I was certainly encouragedto stay in line, as it were. I had very few adventures as a teenager, other thanvisiting my girlfriends some evenings. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did they have high school educations, your parents? Jamieson: Oh, they both went to college. Oh yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So was college in your future as far as they were concerned? Jamieson: Oh, absolutely.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That was a given. Jamieson: Certainly, and I could get the grades and get admitted. My family had a longtradition of going to Union College in New York, in Schenectady, which hadan affiliation with GE. I got early admission there, and both my father and myuncle went there. My father, I think, was very disappointed that I chose to goto MIT, although he never said much about it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It was hands down MIT as far as you were concerned, because of theengineering? Jamieson: Well, it certainly was a well-recognized school. But another factor was that Ihad a girlfriend who went to Tufts, which is in the Boston area, and that hadsome effect on my choice of school.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] I see. Your bringing up was in Mineola? Jamieson: No, I was just born in Mineola. That was the site of the Nassau CountyHospital. We lived in Floral Park.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is that a small place? I’m just wondering what it was like to all of a sudden bein Cambridge. Jamieson: Oh, it was a small town.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So was Cambridge an adjustment? Jamieson: No, because we were just on the border of New York City, and I could get toManhattan when I was a kid for fifteen cents. Ten cents for the bus and fivecents for the subway. That’s what things were like then, and I would often, very often, go into New York to go around the surplus and second-handelectronics shops and just nose around and see what they had. Once in a whileI’d buy something.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So being in an urban setting was something you were comfortable with. Jamieson: Oh, sure, yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What about MIT proper? How was your adjustment? You have to work just toget into MIT. Jamieson: Well, I never worked very hard in high school at all. I was a National HonorSociety member and we had our club room. We could cut class; we never hadto go to class. All we had to do was pass the quizzes and exams. So we’d sitand play bridge when we felt like it and generally had a very relaxed life. Socompared to that, MIT was like being thrown into a cold lake in the middle ofthe winter.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because you’d had an easy time of it in high school, did you have to learnstudy skills, that sort of thing? Jamieson: I was quite well self-disciplined, I think. At the time I went there, MIT used toadmit a freshman class that was 30 percent larger than the size of thegraduating class they expected. So at the beginning of the second year, 30percent of the class would be gone. I thought they were often intellectuallyvery capable but the main reason they failed was lack of personal disciplineand having good work habits in the absence of their parents.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And you’d probably gotten some of that discipline, as you were implying,from your upbringing. Jamieson: It’s my genes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What to say about what I presume was four years at MIT? Jamieson: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you changing your ideas in any way about engineering?  Jamieson: [pause] That’s hard to say. I really didn’t change my interests at all. I guess Irefined them to the point of having as an objective, designing great productsthat were also very profitable. So I’ve always had a business interest as wellas a technical interest. My orientation in product design was to keep things assimple as I could because my maxim was: parts that aren’t there can’t fail.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Where did that business side of it come in? Jamieson: I think because my father had his business, and he had to be aware of thefinancial side of it as well as the technical building side. During his career hebuilt somewhere between fifty and sixty houses as a sole proprietorship.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So he was an influence, you think. It wasn’t just the technical sweetness ofengineering, it was the fact that this field could make practical, profit-makingthings. Jamieson: That’s true. But frankly, I always thought my mother had more of a numberssense than he did. Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, her line of work required that, didn’t it? Jamieson: She was probably the strongest influence on my life and my character.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: In terms of the self-discipline you’re thinking? Jamieson: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And how else maybe? Jamieson: In fact, we happen to have a housekeeper who is German, and she likes to kidme by saying I’m more German than some of her friends in Germany![laughter] I was born here, but I spent a lot of time in Germany.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So unpack that a little bit. What characteristics does that encompass that applyto you—when you say you’re Germanic. Jamieson: Being very conscious of duty, being generally punctual as opposed to showingup whenever I feel like it, doing things often that I don’t like to do. I don’t like to fire people, but I have had to do it; in one case about 100 people in onechunk—and that was half the company. Holding other people to high workstandards, giving more than the minimum, or more than was nominallyexpected.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I can see how that’s going to play out in later life. [chuckling] All right. Soyou graduated from MIT in 1952, right? Jamieson: Fifty-two, right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That’s beginning the post-war boom years. Did you feel, as a young graduate,that you were entering a period of time that was very different from what youhad experienced as a very young person in the Depression? Jamieson: Oh yes. I knew it was very different from the Depression. And I rememberpersonally I was just filled with optimism.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were jobs available? Jamieson: Well, I had a scholarship from Grumman Aircraft [EngineeringCorporation]. I had to work there every summer, and the scholarship,informally at least, committed me to accepting an offer from them when Igraduated.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see that you worked there for a year, 1952 to 1953. Jamieson: Yes. It was actually a year and a half.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What did that entail? Jamieson: Oh, I was an electrical engineer working on flight control systems for militaryaircraft.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that an easy transition? Jamieson: Well, it really wasn’t what I wanted to do. I wanted to be more involved inproduct design. This was more or less quality assuring and testing productsdesigned by others, since I was mostly involved with electronics, andGrumman typically bought those from suppliers. It was fun to fly around in aircraft working on some of these systems, but it wasn’t very educational forme.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You weren’t actually flying though. There was a pilot and you were— Jamieson: No, I was not doing the flying.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And that’s the way airplanes are tested? Jamieson: Well, they were then. We didn’t have computers that did the simulation scalesthat are possible today. But ultimately, yes, every aircraft design has to gothrough a flight test, so to that extent, yes, that’s still done.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was your MIT education serving you well in this job? Jamieson: Oh, it was fine. Sure. I was overqualified, actually. I was bored. Really. I wasactually bored.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] Was that somewhat because there wasn’t a very creative aspect tothis job? Jamieson: That’s right. Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So that probably explains why you didn’t stick with it. Jamieson: Yes, I would say so. Plus the fact that, I think everyone benefits from having amentor, and I really had no mentor there. There was no one with whom Iworked who was really interested in developing my skills.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you were there just to work, to serve the company. Jamieson: That’s right, yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And you were smart enough to recognize that. Jamieson: [chuckling] Well, one might call it that, but I would say more it was boredomand not intelligence. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: During this period, you are in the U.S Army. Was that in the reserves, then?1952 to 1955, first lieutenant, U.S. Army. Jamieson: Right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: At least that first year and a half or so overlaps— Jamieson: I was at Grumman; I was deferred from being called to active duty because ofa military contractor job. And my solution to getting out of Grumman was tojust not put in my request for deferment, which I had to do every six months.And of course when I didn’t do that I was immediately called to active duty.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That was very clever of you. [chuckling] Well, it’s better than going up toyour boss and saying— Jamieson: “I’m bored here. Goodbye.” [laughter] No, I knew enough, even then, not todo that. I spent two years in the army.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Tell me about that. Jamieson: Well, that was very different. I reported for active duty at Fort Dix to acompany commander who had just gotten back from Korea. In fact, the wholeofficer crew there, pretty much, was a bunch that had been in Korea and justgotten back. So I think it’s fair to say they did not think particularly well ofme [chuckling] since I’d never been in combat. I had no military experienceexcept the equivalent of boot camp and the ROTC. Then, since I was inordnance, I immediately was sent to Aberdeen Proving Ground, Maryland,and someone took a look at my resume and decided that I belonged in a radarmaintenance unit. So I spent about six months in Aberdeen going to radarschool.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And did you like that? Jamieson: Well, I was the leading student because I already knew all that stuff! Theother interesting thing was everything was on a wartime footing then, so Iwent to school from 6 p.m. to 2 a.m., so I had my whole days free, which waspretty good duty.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So what did you do with your days, then?  Jamieson: I bought a cheap old sailboat, went sailing. Fooled around with my car,whatever. At that time I couldn’t find any decent housing there because it wasa wartime situation. So my wife [Elizabeth] was living with her parents inNew Jersey. I didn’t put my marriage in there.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: No, you didn’t put your marriage in there. What about that? Jamieson: Well, I met my wife when we were both in school in the Boston area. It wasnot the original girlfriend that caused me to go to MIT. She lived in NewJersey. I’ve forgotten about [left out] a lot of things. I got malaria at the end ofmy first term, sophomore year, because I went on a vacation to Florida withmy parents, and we were on an island off the Florida coast. I came back,actually went back to school. I had to walk across the Harvard bridge to get toMIT. I lived in Boston in my fraternity house—and I could barely make itacross the bridge. I just had no strength at all. So I was put in the infirmarythere, and no one knew what was wrong with me. I had 104º fever for twoweeks, and they should have sent me to Mass General, but I just lay there withno medication, no nothing, and fortunately I recovered since I’m still here.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I’m surprised there was still malaria. You hear about it in the nineteenthcentury. Jamieson: It’s kept very quiet that there is such a thing. But that was quite remarkable, inretrospect, that I recovered.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did they diagnose it finally as malaria? Jamieson: When I got home, my parents sent me to a specialist in blood chemistry at ourlocal hospital. They took a number of blood draws, and he came back with theopinion that it looked to him as though I had had malaria. And sure enough itwould come back about every nine months, six to nine months. I’d get terriblechills and get a very high fever, and that kept up for about seven or eightyears. It’s a pretty miserable disease. Jamieson: So anyhow, my [future] wife and I had been dating, but our romance broke upuntil she came to see me. I had to go to summer school to make up mymissing term; I missed the whole second term, sophomore year. She and herfather were on their way to Canada for a vacation, and they stopped in Boston.She came to see me but found out from my fraternity brothers that I was backin the infirmary. So she came there, and that’s really what got our romancestarted again. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: When did you actually marry? Jamieson: 1953.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I was surprised to hear that as late as that it was hard to find housing. Jamieson: Around Aberdeen, Maryland, because there’s a big army base—local housing.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: When was Levittown and all that? Jamieson: Oh, that was on Long Island. That was existing when I was working.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So that was pre-war? Jamieson: No, it got started after the war. It was probably the first planned community. Ithink it started around 1947, something like that. We had half of a two-familyhouse. That’s where we lived.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So when you talk about the fifties being a boom time, it depends where youare. Jamieson: Yes, as I say, I was going to school at night. They were running double shiftsit was so crowded.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All right. There’s something here on this same CV about [reading from CV]severe arctic climate—radar units— Jamieson: I was supporting radar systems that were providing warning for a SAC[Strategic Air Command] base. I was at Loring Air Force Base, which was infar northern Maine, north of Montreal, Canada, and the winter temperaturesthere went down to minus-45º. We had fifteen feet of snow one winter I wasthere. So we had to supply and support some of the anti-aircraft sites fromhelicopters—the roads were impassable.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But this was all located in Maine. That’s where the units were. Jamieson: That’s right. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I was picturing them up at the North Pole. Jamieson: No, this was the closest point in the United States to Russia and had the mostdays of sun of any location that close to Russia, so that’s why it was chosenfor the air force base.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: This was the beginning of the Cold War when Russia was our enemy. Jamieson: Absolutely. The Cold War hadn’t reached its peak, yet, in fact.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that very conscious in your mind as a military person? Jamieson: Well, I didn’t think enough about what I was doing, frankly. The maxim isthat old men make war and young men get killed in war. And that’s becauseyoung men don’t realize the risks. It’s going to happen to anyone but them. Ifeel a lot of sympathy for the poor guys in Iraq and Afghanistan.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I know. I can’t help reading those obituaries that are listed in the [New York]Times and look at the ages, and so often they’re in their early twenties.They’re the ones that are getting it. Jamieson: Sure, they are. And the ones that aren’t killed are terribly wounded. There aremore wounded.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That’s going to be the legacy of this war, I think, in terms of human suffering. Jamieson: There may have been, I think, about 4,000 killed, but there have been at least20,000 wounded, and mostly missing arms and legs from IEDs [improvisedexplosive devices].<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did this military experience, now that you can look back on it, have anyformative influence on you either professionally or as a person? Jamieson: Well, I formed and was the commanding officer of a small unit. Andoriginally my commanding officer was in New York City, so he didn’t knowwhat was going on! [chuckling] And we were supposed to go to England as aunit but got changed to Maine in two weeks, so we had no arctic equipment atall. I would write a letter at least once a week to this commanding colonel in New York City, pleading for winter clothing. We had some problems withweather.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, 45º below! Jamieson: Sure. In fact, we couldn’t get boots that were really very good for arctic use.So I actually bought a pair of L.L. Bean hunting boots, which have rubberbottoms and leather tops, and I wore those thinking I’d probably get chewedout by someone for being out of uniform. But the air force didn’t care. I guessthe highest-ranking army officer was a lieutenant colonel. Nobody reallycared. So I wore my L.L. Bean hunting boots for the whole time I was there![laughter] And they were fine with a lot of socks.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: In 1956, you become a project engineer for Doelcam. Jamieson: Doelcam, yes, it was a division of Honeywell.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why did you leave the military, and why Doelcam? Jamieson: Well, I had a two-year tour of active duty. I was offered a regular armycommission but I wisely, in retrospect, turned it down.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Dd you ever think that the military would be a career option? Jamieson: Well, I think the military is a very comfortable place to be once you learn thesystem, which I did. That’s really what got me through MIT. Every year atMIT my grades got higher and higher, and it was because I figured out how toget good grades.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] I was going to say, work the system. Jamieson: Work the system, sure. And in fact I had one mechanical engineering coursewhich I hated; it was strength of materials, and I didn’t go to class for thewhole term. I did turn in all the homework and I took all the quizzes. When Ishowed up for the final, the professor was standing at the door and he said,“Well, Mr. Jamieson, I haven’t seen much of you this term.” [laughter] And Isaid, “No, sir, but I did all the homework and took all the quizzes.” So I tookthe final and I passed. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So, why Doelcam? How did that come to be? Jamieson: I think I used the MIT placement service to get a handle on jobs in the Bostonarea, because my original plan was to go back to school and get a master’sdegree.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh really. Jamieson: Sure. In fact, I went to Northeastern University, evenings, while working, fora while. I couldn’t keep it up. I’d never had a nine-to-five job.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Would it have made a difference to have a master’s degree in engineering? Jamieson: Well, as far as credentials, yes. As far as capability, maybe I’ll flatter myselfby saying, “I don’t think so.” [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: An MBA will get you somewhere in your career today, and I am wondering ifit was something similar in engineering. Jamieson: Probably would have. But I think it makes only a difference in the first one ortwo jobs.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Then they look at performance. Jamieson: Performance and capability. I can tell you a little joke about that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All right. Jamieson: In those days there was quite a separation between engineers who worked at adrawing board and those who had desks. Well, I had a desk at Doelcam, but Ireported to a project engineer. I was one of several engineers that did. We gotto the point of having our design done and needing a wiring diagram to build aprototype. And he came to me and asked me if I would work on the drawingboard and do the wiring diagram. I was shocked, because I thought andeveryone else thought, “Poor Jamieson, he’s gotten demoted back to thedrawing board.” Literally. So again, that was a case of my doing somethingthat I really didn’t want to do. But it was discipline. This subsystem that we built—there were 3,000 wires. I finished the wiringdiagram and went down to the lab, and a tech wired up the first system, andthere wasn’t a single mistake. Everything worked. And so my boss then calledme in and said, “Well, now you know why I asked you to do the wiringdiagram. From now on you’re the project engineer.” So I went back to mydesk, and I had the last laugh.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was he testing you? Jamieson: He wasn’t testing me. We had a tight time schedule. He wanted to get to aworking prototype as fast as he could.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But he must have suspected that you could do it. Jamieson: Oh, he did. He said, “Now you know why I asked you to do the wiringdiagram. I knew you would do it and make none or very few mistakes.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now at that point was he looking at what you had done? Or is somehow theaura of an MIT engineering degree carrying you at this point? Jamieson: No. He’d been to MIT himself. Almost everyone at the company had gone toMIT! [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So that wasn’t going to get you head and shoulders above anybody else. Jamieson: It didn’t do a thing, no.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It was performance. All right. So what was that job like? Jamieson: Well, it was very good. It was a really nice place to work.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why was that? Jamieson: It was in the Boston suburbs, originally. And it was not a big company, so Ihad more responsibility there than I might have had in a bigger company. Myboss was actually a mentor, too.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Really.  Jamieson: He taught me a lot. We would go out to—there was a local restaurant wherewe could go out every day and we’d have lunch. Not just he and I—the wholecrew. At that time you could get a lunch for 99 cents, so we’d have a 99-centlunch, and he would take the opportunity to expound on his managementtheories and technical ideas, and I just listened. And he was very good.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was this changing any of your ideas about what you might do in addition toengineering? Jamieson: Well, it got me interested in the financial side of business more so than I hadbeen, although I was always very cost-conscious in designing products. Theonly formally organized venture capital organization in the U.S. at that time,as far as I know, was American Research and Development, which was inBoston. And so I read about some of their activities.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because of this mentor? Is that what got you— Jamieson: No, I’m a compulsive reader. Offering me a book is like offering a drink to analcoholic. [chuckling] Sorry, but that’s the way it is. So I just read everythingI could about business, as well as technical literature.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was Georges Doriot influential in any way? Jamieson: No, but I met ARD people at my next job, which was Adage [Inc.], which wasa company started by three MIT graduates, one of whom I’d gone to highschool with and worked with at Grumman. ARD was the principal investor inthat company.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why did you leave Doelcam? Jamieson: Oh because Adage offered me a substantial increase in salary and stockoptions.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And stock options. Jamieson: Yes. As it turned out, they weren’t ever meaningful or profitable. I think I’dbeen making about $9K a year at Doelcam, and Adage offered me $15[K]. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh that’s quite a leap! Jamieson: Which is what I was worth—at least. [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: No ego there! Jamieson: [chuckling] No. But what really irritated me was that when I went to thegeneral manager of our division and told him I was leaving, he immediatelyoffered me the same salary, and that really got me irritated because to me itmeant that they knew all the while that I was worth the $15K and they didn’tgive it to me. So that was that, but it was a great place to work. I liked it a lot.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What was Adage doing? Jamieson: Analog to digital conversion. That was my first experience with transistors,which were just—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: They were just coming in, weren’t they. Jamieson: Yes. The big thing there was that advanced transistors, very fast— We werestill using germanium transistors, which have a very limited temperaturerange. But a company called General Transistor, in Long Island, came outwith a germanium transistor for a dollar, which was a tremendous pricebreakthrough at the time. So we started using germanium transistors and othersemiconductors.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: My memory’s a little blurry on the transistor, but isn’t Bell Labs— Jamieson: It was invented there by Shockley and his— There were three inventors.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And then Shockley goes to California. Jamieson: Shockley left to start— I guess he joined Fairchild. And then I think he left toform Shockley Semiconductor. And people like Gordon Moore and BobNoyce were there. They split to start Intel.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes.  Jamieson: Actually we—Fairchild was one of our vendors. And I can remember makinga business trip out here and meeting Gordon Moore and Bob Noyce.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh really. Jamieson: Oh sure. That would have been in the early sixties.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: These people were publishing in the literature. Were you reading that kind ofthing? The technical journals? Jamieson: Oh yes, sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you following the development of transistors, because this is a hotperiod. Jamieson: Oh very much so, yes. That’s why we were using Fairchild as a supplier. Mynext job after Adage, which was my first computer-as-such job. A computercontrol company.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But should we say more about Adage? Jamieson: Well, Adage was a tragedy in terms of its business development. The CEOwas a brilliant tech—this is the story of my life—not my life, but otherpeople’s lives that I’ve had to cope with. Technical people often startcompanies thinking they have the management skills to run bigger and biggercompanies. Well, more often than not, they don’t. Bob Noyce is a sterlingexception to that rule. He was just terrific. Adage was founded by a brillianttechnologist who was personally ill-disciplined and just not a capablemanager. So it eventually foundered after I left.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Would you consider it a startup? Jamieson: It was a startup. I was the fifteenth employee.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So that was really your first taste of a startup company? Jamieson: Yes, well, Grumman was a very large company. 20<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You complained earlier on that your first job wasn’t very creative. Jamieson: That’s right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you liking the startup environment? Jamieson: [chuckling] Oh it was completely different! It was a lot of pressure. I meanbusiness pressure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You mean to get a product out and selling it so some money was coming in? Jamieson: Right, yes. There were always cash flow problems.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. And was it venture capital funded? Jamieson: By ARD. They were the only venture capital investor. Other money camefrom doctors and dentists.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: With the advantage of talking to you venture capitalists, I know that venturecapital is more than just investing money. Jamieson: Oh certainly.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It’s building companies. Jamieson: It should be.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, okay, it should be. Jamieson: Now it’s much more investing money. [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I want to hear about that, but we’re not there yet. We’re in the fifties;we’re not up in 2009. Jamieson: That’s right. Well, we’re in the late fifties, early sixties. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What I would like to hear you comment on is how carefully ARD waswatching over this company. Jamieson: Well, one of their principals, whose name was Bill Elfers, who later went onto found Greylock [Partners], which was another one of the early venturecapital firms, was on the Adage board. And so I occasionally, not always, butoccasionally, went to board meetings. And so I met him, and I got to know theARD style.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How would you describe the ARD style? Jamieson: Very businesslike, very gentlemanly, very much based on trust. Unfortunatelyin the case of our company president, some of that trust was misplaced.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So would you say they were less likely to step in than maybe you would havedone at a later date? Jamieson: Yes, I think they should have canned the CEO and found a better one.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But was that maybe just the style of ARD at that point? That this tightermanagement of a company that goes along with your style of venture capitalwasn’t as prevalent at ARD? Jamieson: I really don’t know enough about ARD to say, other than that their biggest hitwas Digital Equipment [Corporation]. There the CEO/founder carried thecompany for quite a long while, although he eventually ran out of gas too.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All right, okay. But you’re learning things all along, aren’t you? Jamieson: Oh sure, sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I hope I’m not making too much of this track to venture capital. Jamieson: It’s your interview. [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: No, it’s your interview! Jamieson: I’m just here to answer questions. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I don’t think passivity is your nature. [chuckling] Anything more to say aboutAdage? You were there five years. Jamieson: As my wife will tell you, I was there too long. She kept urging me to leavebecause of her opinion of our CEO and his cohorts.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, you must have been talking to her quite a bit then. Jamieson: Oh I did, I did. In fact, the company got very low on cash, and I went withoutsalary one time for about six weeks and was bringing my lunch in a brownbag. My team kept asking me—why are you bringing your lunch in? Whyaren’t we going out for lunch? And of course, I couldn’t say, “Well, I’m notgetting paid.” So I would just say, “Well, I’ve decided to just watch my dietfor a while.” Blah, blah, blah, and got away with it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I can see why your wife might have been paying attention if youweren’t getting paid. Jamieson: Yes. I remember one New Year’s Eve we were there till midnight. Weweren’t out partying—my wife was sitting home. We were there working,trying to ship product before year end. It was something.[End Audio File 1]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Tape number two, and it’s the second hour with Mr. Jamieson. It seems thetime to talk about your three children. Jamieson: Okay.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you want to say quickly what they do? Jamieson: Well, my daughter Ellen is a graduate of Mills College. She’s been in poorhealth for about the last ten years but is gradually getting better. She is justabout at the point of wanting to get back and start part-time work. I’m takingher to Germany in a couple of weeks to be looked at by a homeopathic doctorthat I have a lot of respect for. In fact, she is getting some homeopathic treatment now, which is the first thing that she’s gotten that has really helpedher.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And is it because of her that you got interested in homeopathy? Jamieson: No, I go to Europe four or five times a year. I like Switzerland very much.We’ve been going there for thirty years. I love the mountains and I love tohike. And I have a very good friend who lives in the German alps who told meabout this doctor and some of the results of his treatment. He gives courses aswell as practices, and my friend has been to a number of his courses he thinksso well of him.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I hope it cures her. And then the two other children? Jamieson: My eldest son officially is John Burgess III, but he’s called Sandy. He wasvery blond when he was young. He is in the precious stones and jewelrybusiness.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How did that come about—briefly. Jamieson: Who knows. I don’t know. And my youngest son was at Lawrence LivermoreLaboratory but just got laid off due to budget problems.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So Adage and then Memory Systems Division? Jamieson: At Computer Control Company [1963-1968]. That’s right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So how did you become employed there? Jamieson: Well, I stayed with Adage until they got through the bad times and theirbusiness turned, and I felt things were going well enough so that I could getout of the place, honestly. [chuckling] So I started looking for otheropportunities. It was kind of interesting. When I told the CEO that I wasleaving he said, “Well, how can you leave when things are looking so good?”And my answer was, “How could I leave when they were bad.” So—interesting difference of views. So I left.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And then why did you move to Computer Control Company?  Jamieson: It was a combination of analog and digital design, which is what I had hadexperience with at Adage. So there was a fit. But there was need for a newlevel of engineering management there because the company had grown quitewell. We were living in Wellesley. The company was in Framingham, so itwas an easy commute. And it was also a pleasant place to work.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It seems like a lot of job changes since graduation. Let’s see, one, two, three,four. Jamieson: Well, I do have a problem.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What’s your problem? Jamieson: I’m not very good at working for other people, [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I might have guessed! But you’re slowly working up the hierarchy, aren’tyou? Jamieson: Oh sure. I had more and more people to manage, sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But you still were having to report to somebody at Computer ControlCompany? Jamieson: I reported to the chief engineer, and he and I got along fine. We used to havereviews on a regular basis. I’m sure I left Adage making more than I did whenI started, but there was no organization there to have anything that wasregular. Anyhow, we had regular reviews [at Computer Control], and at one ofmy last ones he told me that I caused more trouble than anyone else whoreported to him. And I said, “Well, why do you put up with it?” And he said,“Well, it’s because you get so much done.” And I said, “Well, maybe that’swhy I cause so much trouble!” [laughter] But we were good friends, and westill are.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But he wasn’t a mentor in the way that the man at Doelcam was. Jamieson: No. My manager at Doelcam was the best mentor I had in my whole career.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Anything more to say about Computer Control Company?  Jamieson: Well, then I became chief development engineer.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: This was 1963 to 1968. Why don’t you say something about the status of thecomputer industry at this time. Jamieson: I think the Digital Equipment PDP-16 was probably the first trueminicomputer. And at that time we had, typically, 24-bit word lengths whichled to more capability, but Digital had the right, really the right product. Soour follow-on to our 24-bit machine was the DDP-16, which was a verysuccessful product.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see, and was Computer Control Company thinking of personal use at thispoint? Jamieson: No. Our fully populated computer, of the kind that we built, could easily takeup a room the size of this office.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Really! Jamieson: It would be less powerful than what’s sitting on my desk. [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: These computers would be for industry use? Jamieson: More military at that time. The space program, pretty much, was a big user ofminicomputers.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And is that pretty true of all these companies? That the military contracts werea big part of their business? Jamieson: Military and research applications were where the minicomputers were firstused. Business use, very large computers, which Honeywell made, and IBM,of course, was the lead producer in that market.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you have any opinion about how it is to work under government contract? Jamieson: I was pretty well detached from all the contract stuff. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I’m leaping ahead to all the screw-ups we read about in military contracting,in the wars nowadays. Was the system better in those days? Jamieson: Well, we were not doing any government-sponsored research or development.We were selling products based on commercial systems. But we had asystems engineering department that would configure and add peripherals formilitary applications. I had nothing to do with that. I was on the productdevelopment side of the business. But wars are won by those who make theleast mistakes, not by those who do everything right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is that a Jamieson adage? Jamieson: Yes, I’m full of adages. [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Then you go to Los Angeles to work for Electronic Memories and Magnetics. Jamieson: Right. That was a monumental move.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why did you do it, and what did you find? Jamieson: It was a chance to get into general management much faster. Oh, by that timeComputer Control Company had been acquired by Honeywell, so I was backwith Honeywell again. It was a good company, but they had their practices asto advancement into general management. I thought it would take me anotherfive years to get into some general management role at Honeywell, and Icould immediately do that at Electronic Memories.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Your life, as you’d led it so far, had been very East Coast-oriented. Jamieson: Right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What was it like to go to this place called Los Angeles? Jamieson: Well, I’d been there many times on business, and I always thought it was thelast place in the world that we’d want to live. [chuckling] So, in fact, wethought about the offer for five months before I decided to take it. The way Isold it to my wife was, “Well, we’ll go out for a year and try it out, and if it doesn’t work out, we’ll just move back again, and I’ll get another job backhere.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And here you are, not quite in Southern California. Jamieson: Still stuck here. Just stuck in the mud. [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So did your wife end up liking it? Jamieson: She liked the Los Angeles climate, and we lived in a suburb that was veryeastern, so it was much more comfortable than what one usually thinks ofwhen Los Angeles is mentioned.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And how did the general manager job turn out? Did it live up to yourexpectations? Jamieson: I was in over my head, really, which is when I’ve learned the most in mycareer. I felt significant pressure to pick up all the financial stuff that I neverhad anything to do with at Computer Control, and manage a plant in HongKong as well as our local plant—that was an eye-opener.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you learning by doing? Jamieson: Sure, yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [reading] You started a new subsidiary in Singapore. Jamieson: I’ve said many times that I’ve always learned the most in my career when I’vebeen in a little over my head.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because that’s where the challenge lies, right? Jamieson: Sure, right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And you don’t panic, I don’t imagine. Jamieson: No. [chuckling] <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I surmised that you didn’t. Jamieson: I made a lot of mistakes, but no great big ones.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You were there three years, and then in that period, you were chief operatingofficer at Sycor, [Inc.], in Michigan. Jamieson: Right. That was the low point of our marriage, because I was only home everyother weekend. I couldn’t take the jet lag of flying home every weekend. Itwas a three-hour time difference.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you had a flat in Michigan. Jamieson: I had an apartment that I rented. Well, for six months I lived in the localHilton, and I could see that that was just too much transience for me, so I gotan apartment.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And why were you willing to make such sacrifices for this company? What isSycor? Jamieson: It was a company that had the first microprogrammed computer terminal. Thetechnology was outstanding; the management was very weak. So mycompany, Electronic Memories, invested in Sycor. Sycor was a publiccompany, and I think the public stock at that time was trading for around $12.We bought a convertible preferred at about $4 a share, and that was generalknowledge in the company. And I remember I had to have a company meetingshortly after I got there to introduce myself and answer questions. One of thequestions was, “Well, if Sycor stock is trading for $12, how were you able toinvest at $4?” I never expected that one. So I had to think fast, and my answerwas, “Well, it’s the difference between the retail and the wholesale price.”And amazingly, no one asked what I meant by that—that was the end of thequestions about the stock price.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And you sighed a sigh of relief! Jamieson: I thought it was outrageous myself. It was an outrageous answer!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All right, so that position went on for only about a year.  Jamieson: That was a tremendous learning experience.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Please tell me about that. Jamieson: Well, the reason we were able to invest was that the company was running outof cash, so they needed money, and we were able to negotiate a very favorableprice. After I got there, I cut the employment way back, got the cash burn rateway down. They had product quality problems. Our major customer wasOlivetti, originally an Italian typewriter company. I went to Italy andrenegotiated the contract that we had. The place was running like a hobby—at5:00 the engineering lab would be dead; everyone would be gone. [chuckling]So I knew the style had to change drastically, and I did it by setting anexample. I was there. And after about six months, people started stickingaround until later, and we solved the quality problems and things startedclicking, things got a lot better.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Electronic Memories and Magnetics bought Sycor? Jamieson: Electronic Memories invested in Sycor; they didn’t buy it. It was still a publiccompany. Then when things got running better, I was able to go out and raiseventure capital from venture capitalists to fund the growth and the operations.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So that was your first taste of venture capital? Jamieson: No, I didn’t mention that at Electronic Memories the officers had a littleprivate venture pool going, and I participated in that. I was able to because wehad always saved money compared to the modern style. [chuckling] So Iactually had some capital to invest in startups.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And you must have done all right. Jamieson: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Or you would not have continued. Jamieson: Well, I didn’t understand how difficult a business venture capital was. That’swhy I got in it! I thought it was easy, looking in from the outside. 30<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: At that point were you thinking further than, this is an investment that mightmake me money? Were you realizing that there was probably more to it? Jamieson: No, my focus was on backing startup companies and turning them into bigger,profitable companies. I never thought about it as a way of making a lot ofpersonal money. Although I think I realized at Sycor that I’d never been, up tothen, in a situation where I had any significant equity play in any of thecompanies where I worked. I had Honeywell stock options. They were nice,but they didn’t amount to a fortune.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But you just said that it was personal investment at Electronic Memories. Jamieson: Yes, they turned out well.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You were hoping to make some personal money? Jamieson: Oh that turned out very well, yes. What didn’t turn out well was my being inMichigan. So that’s what led to my leaving Electronic Memories and Sycor.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But you wouldn’t have had to leave Electronic Memories, would you? Jamieson: Well, I couldn’t go back to my previous general management job, so withoutthat there really wasn’t any particular reason to stay.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Your responsibilities now were totally with Sycor. Jamieson: Oh yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It wasn’t just that you were overseeing Sycor. Jamieson: No, I had nothing to do with EMM’s business at that point.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. In 1971, you become special limited partner—and I don’t know whatthe special means—in WestVen Management. Jamieson: It should be WestVen, incidentally. That’s a typo [in my CV]. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was this a venture capital partnership? Jamieson: Yes, of which the Bank of America was the general partner. That’s why I wasnot a general partner, although the actual management were limited partners.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now is it quite common, by this time, for corporations to have a venturecapital wing? Jamieson: Oh the way to get in the business at that time was to join a bank-affiliatedventure fund, which is what WestVen was. The Bank of America also had itsown SBIC, which was separate from WestVen.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, when did the non-SBIC—divisions would you call them?—begin toarise in American business? Jamieson: I’d say in the sixties, the late sixties.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was it what we would think today of venture capital—it just happened to bewithin a larger company? They were doing the same kinds of things? Jamieson: The bank-affiliated funds were doing just what we’re doing—the same kind ofventure capital, yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And that’s what Reid Dennis was doing for Fireman’s Fund? Jamieson: It was with American Express, yes. He was with Fireman’s; it was acquiredby American Express.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I remember that Bob Swanson, who becomes co-founder of Genentech, firstcame out for the venture capital aspect of Citicorp. Citibank, maybe it wascalled at that point. Jamieson: Yes, I think so.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So it is a thing that’s happening. Jamieson: It was the way you get into the business. Of course, private or independentventure funds are much more interesting than the bank ones. Because in the case of the bank ones, I think they took a significant part of the carry,probably paid people’s salaries and bonuses. I don’t really know. I had alimited partnership interest at WestVen. I don’t even remember now howmuch it was, but it was not in any way equal to the ownership of a privateventure firm.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But is this a full-time job? Jamieson: Sure. Oh yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So give me a flavor of what was happening. Jamieson: Well, I was at Sycor and commuting to Los Angeles. And I was introduced toPhilip Greer, who had been with A.G. Becker, which was a significantsecurities firm in New York. He left to form Weiss, Peck, and Greer, whichwas a small sort of boutique Wall Street investment banking firm. Through aco-investment with Bank of America, he had been on a board with one of thevice-presidents of Bank of America, and he talked that person into sponsoringthe start of this venture fund, WestVen. And I was introduced to Philip Greerthrough a mutual friend.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why would Philip Greer be interested in having you as a partner? Jamieson: I had some operating skills, which he didn’t. He was a financial person.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So were you to be the one who actually looked over these companies in termsof their management? Jamieson: Oh there were a number of limited partners or staff members. Phil was veryactive in looking at companies from a financial point of view.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I interpreted what you said was that you were more to look at how theyoperated. Is that not right? Jamieson: Yes, I think that’s true.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Philip Greer was looking back at your considerable experience in actuallyrunning businesses.  Jamieson: I don’t really know. I think the idea might have been that if companies neededto have operating help, I could do something about it, or I could evaluate whattheir operating skills were. I remember him telling me that some of hispartners in New York, or maybe it was acquaintances, asked, “Well, why areyou bringing an operating person into a venture capital business?” [chuckling]So that was the New York view of venture capital, that it was just another sortof investment and that a venture capitalist would not take an active role inmanaging any business. Whereas my view was that the venture capitalbusiness was really more the development of new businesses than a financialactivity and that if the business development were successful, the financialsuccess would follow.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that something that you had gotten from your observation of ARD? Jamieson: I think that influenced it to some extent. However, I had not seen ARDinvolve itself as directly in management as I later involved myself.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, you spoke about the company that floundered for a long time withoutARD stepping in. Jamieson: I think they were too tolerant of the CEO.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But also, you’d had gradually more and more management experience, hadn’tyou, in these various jobs that you’d had? I mean, you’d been a pretty handson-the-company type for a number of years now. Jamieson: Sure. That’s right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You were coming at it from a different perspective, I would think, than theinvestor wanting to make a bit more money but not interested in the companyper se. It was just the investment. Jamieson: That’s right. In fact, I’m educationally unqualified for what I’ve been doingfor thirty years or thirty-five years. [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh everybody notes that too! It’s just a miracle how you happened to staggeralong. Jamieson: I’m very good at fooling people! [laughter] <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is it too cliché to use this difference in ways of looking at risk investment asan East Coast/West Coast division? Jamieson: [pause to think] That’s a good question. No, I wouldn’t [look at it that way.]For instance, Arthur Rock, who at the time I think was in New York, was theprincipal backer of Intel. And he certainly, I think, had in mind building asubstantial business.Well, it’s hard to imagine Bob Noyce not beingsuccessful, in retrospect! [laughing] Maybe it was much less clear then. Youshould interview Arthur Rock. Jamieson: Bob Noyce, unfortunately is dead. His favorite weakness was he was a chainsmoker and never stopped. I admired him very much. He was an MITgraduate too.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Maybe we’re jumping ahead, but the East/West thing interests Pete Bancroftand me: what there is about this region that has been so welcoming of venturecapital and high technology in general. Jamieson: Certainly the New York-based venture investors never invested with the ideaof having any direct involvement in the businesses. I mean, the Rockefellers; Ican’t think of the other [firm name], the second name is Trask—I forget itsfirst name. He was very prominent, Spencer Trask; it was an early venturefirm. Never thought, I think, of building businesses in the sense of havingpersonal involvement in them. They thought of providing a tool with theirmoney, I think, which was another way to view the business. We’ll get ahead of the story, but after Institutional Venture Associates reallyfell apart, loosely speaking, I was approached by Schroders, a London firm, tostart a venture fund for them. We had a discussion of business styles, andtheirs was that they wanted someone to do lots of deals on the basis that a fewof them would work out very well. Now that’s the financial approach: be welldiversified and something will work, even though many don’t. I said, “Well,I’m sorry, that’s not the way I want to engage in the business. I feel that thebusiness should be one of building companies, and if the company-building issuccessful, then the money will follow.” So we had a pleasant discussion but afirm parting of the ways.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, please get back to what this region itself might provide for people likeyou. You did end up in California, and you could have returned to the EastCoast. There must have been something here that kept you.  Jamieson: Well, I’ll give you a couple of reasons. One was that it was too easy to stay.We had a nice house in Wellesley, and the kids were happy. It was a verypleasant place to live. The other one was that I didn’t want to get to be[chuckling] retirement age—I’m laughing because I’m well past the usualretirement age now—and be wondering what would have happened if we’dmoved to the West Coast. [chuckling] That’s why I said, “Well, we’ll go outfor a year and try it out.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Forty years later. Jamieson: Yes, forty years later. There are things that would have been better in the wayof just general lifestyle for us in the East. I’m much more of an easterner thana West Coast person. But all in all, there’s been more business opportunityhere than there would have been there.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And is that in the end what kept you here? Jamieson: [pause to think] Well, I think what kept me here was that I was always busy.[chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: No time to move! Jamieson: No time to think about drastic changes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You know Californians like to think of this particular region, Silicon Valley,as being a risk-tolerant area. Do you find that’s a credible way of looking atit? That people here are willing to start businesses that have a good chance offailing, and if they fail they just—they start another business. Or is that a myththat people here like to propagate? Jamieson: Well, I think that Stanford University had a lot to do with creating theenvironment that led to the start-up business in venture capital opportunity,something which MIT I think missed the boat on.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh do you? Jamieson: Sure. Early on. The only significant, the only company that was an MITspinoff that really got big was Digital Equipment, and that, of course, is gone.It ended up in failure. There are no Intels in the Boston area or on the EastCoast generally. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I interviewed, some time ago, Niels Reimers, who was head of the Office ofTechnology Licensing at Stanford. I thought it was indicative that at one pointin his career he went from Stanford to MIT to get their licensing office up tospeed. Historically you would think it would go the other way—that MIT hadbeen in the technology field longer than Stanford had, and it should have allthe appurtenances for technology transfer and all of that. Jamieson: It never had the leadership. I give most of the Stanford credit to Professor[Frederick] Terman. He was just an outstanding personality. There was noequivalent MIT personality.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: In the end it does take, in many cases, an individual who has that particulardrive. Niels Reimers saw that wonderful work was coming out of Stanford,and some of it was patented, but nobody was working hard on making activelicenses. Jamieson: Well, Reid Dennis had a partner after I left that was from the Stanfordlicensing activity—John Poitras.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, I know that name. Jamieson: He was not a long-term player in the venture business, and I don’t know muchabout why not. Reid could make some comment.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I didn’t know to ask him. Well, I kind of diverted us. Well, what is there to say about WestVen as, Iguess we would say, your formal introduction to venture capital? Is that fair? Jamieson: Yes, in those days the way to get into the business was by joining a bankaffiliated venture fund. And I knew, at the time I made the decision to do that,that Phil Greer and I were not likely to be together long.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] Would you care to go into that? Jamieson: Let me make a general comment, which is that I think people from Wall Streetor New York, have much more of a transaction mentality than an investormentality. Phil’s emphasis was on doing deals. He was like Schroders, Ithink—the more deals done, the better he would like it. And I was much more interested in the operating side of businesses and in trying to be selective inchoosing businesses which had a good long-term chance of success. So it’snot a matter of right and wrong; it’s just a matter of different approaches tothe business. So I thought, eventually, our differences would accentuate ratherthan minimize, and in fact they did.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I’ve talked to Bill Draper, as I mentioned, and he claims that Draper, Gaither,& Anderson was the first venture capital firm. I suppose he’s meaning freestanding—not associated with a larger company. But would you even go thatfar? Jamieson: Well, I believe ARD was; I think they started in 1957. Draper, Gaither &Anderson were in business before then?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: No. Jamieson: [Georges] Doriot had taught at Harvard Business School.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That’s right. Maybe Bill said on the West Coast. Jamieson: As far as I know that was certainly so.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you aware of the free-standing limited partnerships that were beginningto spring up? Jamieson: Sure, sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because by ’72, there’s also Kleiner & Perkins. Jamieson: That’s right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And maybe others. Jamieson: In fact when IVA started, we and Kleiner Perkins were the only venture firmsat 3000 Sand Hill [Road, Menlo Park].<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I looked for Kleiner Perkins on the directory there, and I didn’t see themlisted.  Jamieson: Oh they’re not here anymore. They have their own building down the road.They’re much too big for 3000 Sand Hill.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Should we get into Institutional Venture Partners? Jamieson: It was IVA [Institutional Venture Associates] originally.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you part of IVA? Jamieson: Sure. I was a founder, along with Burt McMurtry and Reid Dennis and oneother partner. IVP is the current name, but when I was there, I believe it wasInstitutional Venture Associates, so that could be changed.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Reid Dennis made a distinction between the two. Jamieson: Yes, IVP is what he carried on with after IVA disbanded.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was IVA founded in 1973? Jamieson: Yes. Well, it actually raised its capital in ’74, but it started in ’73. I was therefrom September of ’73 on.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you want to talk about how the three of you, right, are the generalpartners? Reid Dennis, Burt McMurtry, and— Jamieson: Well, there were four. The fourth one left the partnership.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, who was that? Jamieson: Jim Norris. He worked for Reid at American Express.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, I remember the name now. Do you want to say how you met and howyou decided to form this enterprise? Jamieson: One of the companies that the officer group of Electronic Memories investedin was Storage Technology, in Boulder, Colorado. Reid looked at the samestartup, I guess for American Express. He was on the board of Storage Tech. And we had a venture capitalist association, Western Association of VentureCapitalists, which at that time met for lunch about once a month in SanFrancisco, and I got to know Reid by being active in that organization.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And Burt McMurtry? Jamieson: He was in the venture business with a person named Jack Melchor.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh yes. Jamieson: I don’t recall the name of their partnership, but I think he and Jack haddifferences in style. Their principal investor was an Arabian—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That’s right. The name begins with K. Jamieson: Khashoggi. Adnan Khashoggi.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, exactly. Jamieson: I do remember some names! [chuckling] 0f course that business, as a privateventure fund, preceded IVA. It was really a family fund for this Khashoggifamily; it was not an organized entity.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So what was the genesis of the IVA partnership? Jamieson: Reid had been a personal venture investor since the early fifties in Ampex, forinstance. I think he did Measurex.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, he did, and he did well. Jamieson: Did very well, so he wanted to get in the venture business. He was in themutual funds business with American Express, so they decided to split, and hegot American Express to back him contingent on his finding suitable partners[chuckling] who turned out to be Norris—well, Norris was there [at AmericanExpress]—who turned out to be Burt McMurtry and me. So that’s how we allgot together. And then we spent about nine months trying to raise money in the midst ofthe ’73 oil crisis and the market decline. It was just like today, or the past few 40months. And I remember we visited—I think it was Travelers Insurance andhad a very good meeting with Eli Shapiro, who was their chairman and alsoon the Harvard Business School faculty, and their V.P. of investments. Wethought we’d had a great meeting, so we all came back here and waited aboutthree weeks and heard nothing. So since Reid was the senior partner, we elected him to make a call and seewhat was going on, why we hadn’t heard. So he called this VP of investmentat Travelers and said that from our view we thought we’d had a very goodmeeting and were looking forward to having them as limited partners, andwhat was their thinking? And there was a few seconds of silence on the otherend of the phone and then this VP said, “What’s the matter with you guys onthe West Coast? Don’t you know the sky is falling?” So that was the end of Travelers. And then we had another insurancecompany, I think it was, who had committed and which backed out a coupleof months before our planned closing, and that put us below our minimumcapital, which I think was $15 million. So we had to start over again, and wehad to tell all of the committed partners that we were below our minimum andso we could not close as planned. Wonderful.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, just a great way to start a partnership. Jamieson: What a friend, what a friend! [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What was this doing to you psychologically? Jamieson: Oh it was tough.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you ever think, I’ll just go back and get a job? Jamieson: I never thought about it, no. I thought something would happen, and as I say,in those days, starting in the fifties, I was full of optimism. I didn’t knowenough to be critical.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What about your wife? Your wife had stepped in before when you weren’tgetting paid and said something. Jamieson: That’s right. Oh well, I stayed at Adage much past the not-getting-paid period. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: She must have been getting a little concerned about this new partnership goingnowhere or maybe going down. Jamieson: I imagine she was.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But she was not saying so? Jamieson: Maybe I didn’t want to have an answer, so I didn’t ask her. [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, shall we stop there? I have some questions off-tape to get me orientedfor the next interview. Is that all right with you as a pause? Jamieson: That’s fine.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Today is July 28, 2009, and this is the second interview with Mr. Jamieson. Iwant to start with a comment that you made last time. You said something tothe effect that IVA, which is Institutional Venture Associates, fell apart. Jamieson: Yes, right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why? Give me some background. Jamieson: Well, I was not really directly involved, but there was a conflict between mytwo other partners. One felt, in view of what he had contributed to thepartnership in the way of successes, he was unfairly compensated in terms ofhis ownership, whatever, and that he should have a larger ownership share inany successor partnership. I had no opinion on the matter; I was not involvedin the discussion at all. So I found out about it after the fact. [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. Jamieson: Well, it was quite a surprise to me, and not a happy one. But like many otherevents in my life, things that at the time seemed to be great misfortunes turnout very much for the better, so it was one of those. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Meaning that then you had to find something else? Jamieson: Well, no. Frankly, I was fed up with partners after hearing what happened,and for four years I just went back to investing my own capital, which workedout fine because that really laid the foundation for Sigma I.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It wasn’t yet Jamieson and Company? Jamieson: I had started Jamieson and Company before Sigma [Partners], because my twopartners—each had gone off and started a new institutional partnership. I wasinvolved in neither of those, so I wanted to continue investing, and the vehiclewas Jamieson and Company.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So your two former partners somehow found a modus operandi. IVA becameInstitutional Venture Partners at that point, didn’t it? Jamieson: Yes, and Burt McMurtry started a new partnership at the same time,Technology Venture Investors. TVI.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, TVI. So they worked it out somehow. Jamieson: Well, they worked it out to separate. They didn’t want to be in business witheach other.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: According to your chronology, you were at IVA/IVP from 1973 to 1994—isthat indeed right? Jamieson: Oh well that was the legal dissolution of the partnership. This controversy, orthis disagreement, took place in 1980, and the legal entity continued becausethe partnership still had investments which had to be liquidated.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see, but you were not active in it at that point? Jamieson: Reid Dennis had the longest-lasting investment that required that thepartnership continue in business.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see, but it wasn’t starting any new deals.  Jamieson: It wasn’t doing any—it was just liquidating slowly [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see, I see. Okay. You can see how it’s a little confusing to me, though. Jamieson: I understand, yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And then Sigma Partners [1984-1993] came along, and I know that yourpartner was named Brad [C. Bradford] Jeffries. How did you become partners,and what was his background? Jamieson: Well, he was actually the attorney for the formation of Sigma. After themoney was raised, there was some question as to what would happen if Ibecame disabled or incapacitated. The solution was that he was given a minorpartnership interest in exchange for becoming a partner.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But Sigma was really Burgess Jamieson. Jamieson: Yes, I raised the money, right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And how did you raise the money? What were you hoping to invest in? Jamieson: Well, those are two different questions.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, please start with one. Jamieson: How I raised the money was I took the easy route, although I had it backwardswhat would happen. I thought it would be very hard to raise the money andvery easy to assemble a group of partners—and the reverse was true. It wasmuch easier to raise the money than I thought and much harder to staff thepartnership. I never had any intention of running it as a one-man generalpartnership. The way I raised the money was to pick off the low-hanging fruitby going around to the partners of IVA and asking them for money. Myrecollection is that about half the capital came from former IVA partners. Soonce that much was raised, it was easier to attract other money, although thelast capital came from Sanwa Bank in Japan, to which I was a consultant forabout ten years starting in 1980.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Going back to IVA partners wasn’t considered fishing in the same pond?  Jamieson: Well, Reid and Burt had already done the same thing, so they had hardly anyreason to complain, and they didn’t complain. Although I’m told that Reidsaid, when he was about to start his second partnership, that I’d taken all themoney. But that wasn’t true. [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: He somehow found some more somewhere. Jamieson: Sure, of course. He’s very good at raising money.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All right. Then the second question—what did you do with it? Jamieson: All right. I thought that a decision to invest in Sigma Partners would beexceptionally easy, because for four years I’d been doing startups, and I couldsimply cherry-pick, as it were, my own portfolio, get in some very goodcompanies in later rounds, and therefore have lower risk than a typical venturecapital partnership. And in fact that was true, because we only lost 5 percentof our capital. [chuckling] One of the partners, I think it was Rod Adams ofStanford, complained and said, ‘Well, Burge, that means you weren’t takingenough risk.” [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you can’t win, can you! Jamieson: You can’t please everyone. You can’t please everyone.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I gather that 5 percent is a very low number. Jamieson: Oh absolutely.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What is more average? Jamieson: I don’t really know, but I would say there are some partnerships that lose alltheir capital! Not many, but there have been some real bloopers along theway. More in the later years than recent, although I’m aware of one group,one partnership, that started about the time of Sigma with a faulty conceptwhich did lose all of its capital. In fact, it raised some debt and not only lostits original capital but all the debt as well. Needless to say, those people arenot in business now. [chuckling] <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I bet they’re not. When investors have that kind of experience, is it yourexperience that they’re very leery about further investment? Or do they justsay, “Well, that was a bad deal; I’m going to go on to better ones.” Jamieson: Well, the statistics show that there’s a great adherence to investing in venturecapital/private partnerships in spite of greatly reduced rates of return in thiscentury. I think the returns in the venture capital business, in general, peakedin 2000 or 2001, and they’ve never been the same since.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But is that pattern because the returns may be lower, but they’re still betterthan other forms of investment? Why do people continue to invest in venturecapital? Jamieson: Well, to begin with, there are other kinds of investment that yield better ratesof return in recent years. As to why institutions continue investing, you’ll haveto ask them. Other than an indirect interest in Sigma partnerships that haveformed since then, I’ve only made one venture capital investment since I leftSigma, and that’s [in] a German firm that’s oriented towards startups.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You said, the returns peaked in 2000-2001. Jamieson: Yes, the rates of return were very good in the late twentieth century. I wastalking about the twenty-first century [when the returns went down].<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, that’s understandable with the economic downturn. Jamieson: From what I see, the typical, the average of many funds in terms of return oncash is one-and-a-half times, compared to many times that. The last Sigmapartnership, of which I was the managing partner, returned eight times itscash. That was an ’89 partnership.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, since the subject has come up, namely the economic downturn, do youhave observations to make? Jamieson: Well, personally I feel that the fiscal and monetary policies of our governmentare incorrect and will lead at some point in future time to significant rates ofinflation as were experienced in the seventies. There’s no justification orvalidation yet for the huge bailout funds that have been established, and eventhe president of Czechoslovakia, when he saw what the U.S. was doing,declared it as “the road to hell.” <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I read that. Jamieson: I’m inclined to agree with him.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you believe, however, that financial institutions need some restructuring? Jamieson: Well, certainly the educational institution endowment funds have tosignificantly change their policies, because they’re very heavily orientedtoward private partnerships, which involve lockups of many years andcontinued capital calls over some time period. In fact, some funds apparentlydon’t have the liquidity to make the capital calls that they’re subject to, sothey have a big problem.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: If you were directing one of these funds, what would you be investing in? Jamieson: Well, I would be more inclined to invest in assets that are more inflationproof. I would say, in general, that precious metals are a significantopportunity and very liquid. Both the metals themselves and the companiesthat mine them have assets in the ground, and you can extend that to oil,uranium, even base metals, which largely track rates of inflation in theirmarket prices.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you see institutions moving in those directions? Jamieson: Just starting. Well, some have recognized that danger earlier, but there still isno large general trend toward that. I sit on a couple of investment committees,and in one case we have a well-known advisory firm counseling us, and—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Investment committees at educational institutions? Jamieson: No, these are cultural ones. I recommended an investment in an asset that Ifelt was more inflation proof than many others that we have. Afterconsiderable discussion over quite a few months we agreed to invest in thatasset, and I turned to our advisor/representative and asked him if among hisclients if any of them had investments in this particular asset and he said,“No.” And my answer was, “Good!” [laughter] <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, what about your own business? What about Jamieson and Company?How has it been affected, and what are you maybe doing differently than youwere doing in good times, aside from investing more broadly? Jamieson: Well, what do you define as good times? Is that 1999 or 2007?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, all right, better times. Pre-the downturn, which I guess you date back tolate 2008, right? Jamieson: Well, it actually started in spring of 2007, I would say. But other people havedifferent opinions. Well, I have liquidated a lot of equities. For years, becauseof my age, I have more fixed income investments than I ever dreamed that Iwould have when I was in the venture capital business, and that’s been good.I’ve been diversified into foreign currencies since 2002; that’s worked outvery well because of the weakness of the dollar. I have added to my positions,or my position, in inflation-resistant assets, and so far that’s worked out well.But on the other hand, I have to say, I lost money in 2008, but not nearly asmuch as heavily equity-oriented investors or the very large universityendowments. So on a relative basis, my portfolio performed well in the first—I don’t have a Q2 balance sheet yet, but in the first quarter of this year I wasflat, basically, no change.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Which is good in this situation. Jamieson: Yes, in this environment, I would say it’s good, yes. But it’s a very difficulttime, and it takes a lot of time for gathering information and thinking aboutwhat it all means.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do I gather from what you’re saying that Jamieson and Company is notstrictly a venture capital institution? Jamieson: It has almost nothing to do with venture capital.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. Jamieson: Now. Originally, it did. It was a vehicle for mainly investing in startups,which I did from 1980 to ’84.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And this is with all your own money, right?  Jamieson: Oh yes, it was all my own money, right. As I say, it was cherry-picking thatportfolio that made me think that an investment in Sigma I was a very easydecision. And I told you what our total loss was. On the other hand, returnswere not as high as some funds; I think our return was somewhere in the 20percent annualized range, which is okay, but not startling.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you happy with that? Jamieson: I was happy to be able to raise the money and get a business going.[chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Getting back to starting Sigma, you said there was a difficulty in findingpartners— Jamieson: General partners, not limited partners.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, I see. Jamieson: No, it was relatively easy to raise the money. As I say, half of it came fromIVA investors, and the original goal was to raise $20-$25 million. I didn’twant a big partnership, and we ended up raising $44 million and just had tocut it off at that point.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did it work well just to have one other general partner who, from the way I’minterpreting what you said, was really there for a legal reason, not for aninvestor reason. So it was essentially you that was head of this partnership,right? Jamieson: Yes, for a while. But I was actively looking for additional partners andassociates.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why did you have trouble? Jamieson: Well, it was probably me. I’m too demanding. [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: In what sort of way? How are you demanding?  Jamieson: I have high-performance standards which I fail to meet myself from time totime.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But everybody else has to meet them. Jamieson: No, I don’t expect—there’s a difference between expectation—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That was a facetious remark. I apologize. [chuckling] Jamieson: That’s all right. In fact, I’ve had people volunteer to come and work for mefor free, but I’ve turned them down because I knew what they were up to.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Namely, what? Jamieson: They wanted to pick my brain and then just take off and start their ownpartnerships. Why should I work with someone who had no real commitmentto stay?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why are you good at what you do? Jamieson: Well, I’m demanding; I have high personal standards. I have a better balancebetween quantitative and intuitive decision-making. It always used to botherme that, to use an example, Reid Dennis was as intuitive as he was andprobably still is, but I understand much more now why he was that way, notthat I would go as far toward the intuitive balance as he has or did. But Iunderstand, really much more what role intuition can play in makinginvestment decisions, and I find that the more it’s used the better it gets.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you think that’s a function of experience? Jamieson: Experience in—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Living. When you talk about intuition, you’re meaning in sizing up otherpeople? Jamieson: Yes, of course, right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, don’t you think most people get better at that as they get older? 50 Jamieson: Well, I never thought about it that way! [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Maybe I’m being very stereotypical, and I’m sure you will tell me if I am, butI don’t think of engineers, which you were in the beginning, as particularlyprizing intuition. Jamieson: I think as a generalization, that’s quite true. Sure. We’re much more thingsand numbers-oriented than people-oriented, and maybe I was that way to afault at some point.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, you obviously have learned— Jamieson: Oh I hope so.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I mean more than all the facts that you obviously have acquired over theyears, but learning that intuition is a part of the equation. Was there anythingthat might have sparked your realization that intuition was important as wellas knowing the hard facts? Jamieson: Well, one more or less extreme example of using intuition was that at Sigmawe talked to a group wanting to start a company named Vermeer[Technologies, Inc.]. They wanted to start it on two coasts, which we thoughtdidn’t make any sense. The founder [chuckling] was quite a difficult characterto deal with. I don’t think he ever appeared at a meeting in anything but jeansand a t-shirt. And we had a number of meetings with him and other membersof the management team. We said that we wouldn’t invest unless they choseto start the company on one coast, and we didn’t care which as long as theirgroup was all together. They agreed to that, and my partners, as I recall, stillhad some significant doubts. I did too. But I remember one partnershipmeeting in which I said, “Okay. We’re going to back this group.” And I’dnever said anything like that before! And it was just a feeling that there wasenough drive and technological skills to lead to a success. Well, to make along story short, after about two or two-and-a-half years, we sold the companyto Microsoft for $130 million in stock, following which the stock quadrupled.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh my heavens! Jamieson: So it turned into a very successful deal. We probably didn’t have enoughmoney in it as we should have, in retrospect, but that’s always the problem.One can never have too much in a good deal or too little in a bad deal. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you have any clue as to why you had that insight or intuition, which youobviously felt was new to you. Jamieson: Yes. I just was very convinced of his brilliance, and I had no—or I shouldn’tsay no—little confidence in his ability to run a company. But I thought wecould surround him— Well, some of his team had better management skills,and I thought we could surround him, over time, with enough managementskills to make the business run. I really never thought we would wind upselling it to Microsoft. I thought it was strong enough to eventually go public,but it was a very happy ending.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And why did it get sold to Microsoft? Jamieson: Well, we got a very favorable price.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It was too good to resist. Jamieson: Too good to turn down.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: If you don’t mind, I’m going to ask you some very direct questions aboutinvestment strategy. Jamieson: Sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And then we’ll pick up the companies that you want to talk about. Myquestions are very basic. I want to know what are the prime things that you’relooking for when you consider an investment. Jamieson: In the area in which I’ve been most active I would say technological andmanagement skills, commitment, and integrity.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And at some point intuition about the entrepreneur, right? Jamieson: Oh I was speaking about what qualities I’m looking for. Yes, all right. I haveto feel confidence and trust in the person or people that we’re backing.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And that’s a very intuitive thing, isn’t it?  Jamieson: Very much so.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, so at a certain level, you’ve had to use intuition all along, have you not?Because you have to deal with people. Jamieson: In the pre-PC days, a lot could be revealed in a business plan. Now, usingExcel, it’s so easy to crank out many, many business plans that they are muchless revealing in terms of integrity or thoughtfulness than they used to be.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you did put a lot of credence into the business plan. Jamieson: I still do. But it’s easy to ratio-test business plans and see whether they areinternally consistent or not. And in spite of Excel, some people can’t seem tomanage that to work out. [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And you catch that? Jamieson: Sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And what do you mean by ratio test? Jamieson: Oh for instance if you measure inventory turns or inventories versus sales,there’s a range of inventory turns per year which is reasonable orunreasonable.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Are you a little unusual in paying close attention to such parameters? Jamieson: I don’t really know. I don’t know how other venture capitalists makedecisions. They don’t ask me and I don’t ask them! [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why is that? Jamieson: Maybe it’s a trade secret. Who knows? I don’t know.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I’m just getting to know some venture capitalists, but I would think that— Inmost fields, there’s a lot of shop talk.  Jamieson: There are among some other people, but maybe I’m not good at that. I don’tknow; I’ve never relied on it particularly.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, well, maybe you’re just satisfied with the way you go about it. Jamieson: I could be more congenial. Maybe I’m too much of a loner.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, well, maybe you like to be in control, too. Jamieson: In terms of wanting to run companies I invest in, absolutely not, absolutelynot.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is that so? But what about running your own business? You prefer it to be inyour own hands? Jamieson: Sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why doesn’t that attitude apply towards companies? Jamieson: Well, if one invests in businesses with the intent to run them, one cannot makemany investments. [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right. It’s as simple as that. Jamieson: Not that I’m recommending shot-gunning deals in constructing a portfolio.But one has to have leverage in investing in companies, and there’s no pointin carefully analyzing and considering entrepreneurs if one intends to run thecompany himself anyhow. Why bother?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, that’s true. On the other hand, I’ve been learning from your generationof venture capitalists that it is not simply a matter of investment. It’s a matterof building companies. Jamieson: Well, not everyone. Other people follow the shot-gunning approach. In fact, Idon’t know if I told you this in the first meeting, but at one point before Sigmastarted, I was approached by Schroders, the famous English banking firm. Ididn’t tell you that? <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I don’t think so, no. Jamieson: Anyhow, I met with one of their vice presidents. We had a very pleasantlunch. They wanted someone to start a venture capital arm for them in theU.S., and we discussed styles of business. Their wish, at the time, was to havetheir venture business run in a style of making many investments in the hopethat a few of them would turn out to be big bangs.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh I see. Jamieson: And when I heard that I just said, “Well, I’m sorry, that certainly is a businessstrategy.” I think he was probably thinking of 3i [Group], the then favorablywell-known English venture firm which happened to be public also, and theirstyle was to do many deals and hope that a few would turn out well. At leastthat’s how I interpret their style. I said, “Well—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did it work out for them? Jamieson: Well, in the long term it didn’t work out very well at all, because they were ina lot of trouble. I did invest in a partnership in Germany that was sold to themat the peak of the market, and they proceeded to perform not very well at all. So anyhow, I said, “Well, that’s a style, and it’s not one that I want to follow.So I don’t think we have much more to talk about.” And we each went ourown ways. That was fine.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Can you say something about how you usually enter into the management of acompany? You’re usually sitting on the board, right? Jamieson: Sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So part of your job is giving management advice? Jamieson: Or in extreme cases to hire or fire the CEO. [chuckling] Too bad, butsometimes it works out to be the latter.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is that usually an agonizing situation?  Jamieson: Sure. I was on one board where I recognized that we had a CEO problem, andit took me about a year to convince the board that without making a CEOchange, we were not going to do well at all. In the meantime I was called a lotof fairly unpleasant names.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I’ve heard statements like that before from the people I’ve talked with. Peoplein general don’t like to have to fire people. Jamieson: No.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is that because of the human cost? Jamieson: It’s because of swapping a known for an unknown.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. Jamieson: And I think there’s a tendency to think of well, we can get along with Mr. X.He may have some negative qualities but he also has some good ones, andlet’s try to work around the weak ones and emphasize the good ones.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, you were doing that a little in the company that you decided intuitivelyto invest in. You found a brilliant man, and you would put people around himthat could counter his deficiencies, is the way I interpreted it. Jamieson: Sure, but that company had never gotten to the stage where his managementskills got much of a test, in that we sold it to Microsoft before it really had togo through the agony of being a public company. So that was fortunate for us,and fortunate for him.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: In a general sense, is there more to be said about what you feel a venturecapitalist’s responsibility is as a board member? Jamieson: I don’t feel that in terms of action it should be any different from any otherboard member. The fact is though that other board members rarely take theinterest in the companies on whose boards they sit that venture capitalists do,because venture capitalists have significant money at stake in the success ofthe company. In fact, I make the general comment that CEOs of othercompanies, who sit on boards, typically don’t have the time to spend outsideof board meetings and really understanding what’s going on, what’s reallyhappening. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Does the responsibility of investing other people’s money weigh on yoursoul? Jamieson: Oh yes—probably too much. I’m too serious about it; I’m glad not to havethat responsibility now.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is that one reason why you have drifted away from venture capitalinvestment? Jamieson: No, it’s simply because I like to do things I think I can make money at. I don’tfeel that the illiquidity or the profit opportunity in venture capital in thiscentury so far makes up for the lack of liquidity. It doesn’t make sense in myhumble estimation.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Talk a little about due diligence and what you might do in connection withlooking at a new possible investment. Jamieson: Well, we’ve talked about some of it so far. One aspect I didn’t particularlymention is reference checking. And I would say most venture funds don’t doenough of it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And that means picking up the phone? Jamieson: Yes, picking up the phone, sure. Making cold calls, talking initially to thereferences whose names you’ve gotten from the subject. But then getting fromthem the other names that you didn’t get [initially]. That’s a skill that I don’tthink many people have. Simply calling a list of references that one is givenby the subject is— It means something, or what they say means something,but you really have to get to the names you didn’t get [from the entrepreneur].<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And that, I would think, would be greatly helped by your experience in thefield, just knowing who to go to. Jamieson: I would say I certainly used to, but I’ve been out of the field for so long Idon’t view myself as being current. I do recall one case at Sigma where wewere looking at an opportunity, and one of my partners was doing the work.He made something like twenty reference checks, and they all seemed fine,and he felt this was enough. There was one that bothered me, or one aspectthat I didn’t feel we covered. I said, “Well, just make one more call,” and identified who to call. Well, we found that the company really didn’t own thepatents that it claimed to.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That’s rather a large gap. Jamieson: Sure. So that was a very good lesson.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that intuitive on your part? Did you just sense that there was somethingwrong? Jamieson: I had no specific idea of what it was we didn’t know; I just had a feeling therewas something we really hadn’t covered thoroughly enough.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Remarkable. Jamieson: Well, it was lucky. It was very lucky. I’ll give you another one of my maxims,incidentally, which is: The battle in life is to get smarter faster than you’regetting older.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] That’s a good one! Jamieson: Sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How important is it to you to have knowledge of the technology of thecompany that you’re investing in? Jamieson: Well, one obviously doesn’t want to feel that he knows more about thetechnology than the management of the company. But I’d say it’s important toknow enough not to be fooled. For instance, I can recall interviewing anothermember of a management team who considered himself, I guess, a futurist. Hesaid—this was back probably in the eighties— “At some point, people willhave cellular radios the size of a wristwatch. They’ll just wear them on theirarm.” And I said, “Well.” “And they would communicate through satellite.” Isaid, “Oh that’s very interesting. Well, how will they communicate?” “Ohthey’ll communicate using infrared.” I said, “Oh that’s even more interesting.What will they do when it rains?” [chuckling] Well, he obviously was makingup a story that sounded clever but it didn’t make any sense. So he was byebye. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, as far as I know, you haven’t invested in biologically based companies.Is that true? Jamieson: Well, we did one at Sigma, but I have no knowledge—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because you don’t have that kind of background. Jamieson: No, and I could be fooled. So why should I invest in things I don’t knowanything about.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It makes sense to me. By implication you’ve talked about people skills. On theother hand, you’ve talked about yourself as a—what word did you use? Not anisolationist— Jamieson: Demanding?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: No. Jamieson: I could be more congenial or collaborative.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, congenial, I think that was the word. Then my question is, where arepeople skills in this whole array? Jamieson: Mine?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, yours. I think some people probably prioritize that more than I’mimagining that you do. Jamieson: Oh, I value them in other people.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Look at Pitch Johnson, for example, who seems to me to be an extrovert,seems to love people. Jamieson: Sure, right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: He’s a different personality than you are.  Jamieson: Sure. Well, he and I would probably make a good team if we could stand eachother! [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Reid Dennis has a different approach than you do to investment. And some ofthat, I think, is personality. Do you? Jamieson: Absolutely, and I was trying to express how wrong my thinking was at thatpoint in my career, that intuition really wasn’t nearly as important as morequantitative things. I was wrong.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, you were very clear about that, I think. And yet you also said you didn’tbelieve in going as far as Reid did. Jamieson: No, I don’t believe in ignoring quantitative things or ignoring referencechecks.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And of course it’s hard to dissect all this out, isn’t it? Jamieson: I don’t mean to say that Reid does either of those. I’m just saying—that’s anextreme.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You were very clear in talking about your early life that you were headed at avery early age to a technical background.There are many things that feed in toform the way you go about life, the way you consequently go about yourbusiness. Jamieson: Sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But personality is one of the things that goes into it. Jamieson: That’s right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I’m stating the obvious, aren’t I? [chuckling]Did you read many, many, many business plans? Jamieson: Oh sure. We used to track them in one partnership, and my recollection is—I’m not sure—I think in one year we got 500 or 600. 60<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How would you select? Jamieson: Well, you scan them. One of my other maxims about people writing businessplans is never write more than twenty pages. If you can’t get the messageacross in twenty pages, you don’t know what you’re talking about.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, and nobody’s going to read it. Jamieson: No one will take the time to read more than that. And only some fraction ofthe people that get it will get through the whole twenty pages. But that’s amaximum not an optimum.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Are you conscious that you are, in a sense, a repository of an incredibleamount of technical and business and financial information? Because of justwhat you have to survey. Jamieson: Sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is that a consciousness that you have? Jamieson: Well, my objective is to know everything about everything.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] That might be a little difficult. Jamieson: I’m a compulsive reader, for instance, as I think I said. Giving me a book islike offering a drink to an alcoholic.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It seems to me that the venture capital industry, because it must select certaininvestments over others, that there’s a huge wastage of information that youdon’t act upon. Is that knowledge about a variety of companies, only a veryfew of which can you possibly invest in, then lost? What happens to it? Whenyou think about the venture capital industry in general, there’s a tremendousamount of accumulated technological, business, financial, economicinformation—even information about people. Are you, as an industry, or evenmore grandly, are we as a nation, taking full advantage of this body ofknowledge? Jamieson: Well, technologically, who knows. There’s so much of it that it’s hard to givean answer to that. I will say though that I think the U.S. government seems to me to be completely unaware of the importance of encouraging startups andsmall companies. Many of the actions that are being taken in regulation andtaxation are very, very negative for small companies, very negative.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And you’re referring to the Obama administration? Jamieson: Yes, sure. But the causes extend back into the 1990s, the causes of the generalproblem of an overleveraged economy, where the leverage is now collapsing.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And do you really think the actions are directed at startups? Or is it more wehave a problem with the way our economic system is structured, and we needto make some corrections, and it ends up having repercussions for newcompanies? Jamieson: I think we have a problem of indirect damage or lack of insight or thinking onthe part of Congress and the appointed officials in general.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What are your organizations doing about that? I was going to get to yourconnection with the Western Association of Venture Capitalists. Jamieson: Oh that was years ago. I have no connection now with the venture capitalbusiness.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do the WAVC and the National Venture Capital Association both havelobbying activities? Jamieson: Well, NVCA did. As I say, I’m so disconnected now, I don’t know.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I was just wondering who’s there in Washington representing venturecapital? Jamieson: Oh, I think the representation is very weak. And I say that without reallyknowing what it is. I just go by what I read in the press about anyrepresentation for small companies and startups, and I see literally next tonothing.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That reminds me of an article I read in the New York Times, July 7, 2009,“Venture Capitalists Look for Return to the ABCs.” The article seems toimply that your generation’s way of doing venture capital, some peopleadvocate is what the industry should return to. Did you see this?  Jamieson: No, I didn’t.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [Quoting] “Our biggest challenge today for venture capital is to think smaller,to go back to the basics. That many firms are trying to back too many differentstartups.” In other words, spreading themselves too thin. Jamieson: Well, I think there’s a simple solution to that! [chuckling] Don’t raise so muchmoney. The business is ten times or more the size that it was when it wassuccessful. There’s too much money chasing too few competententrepreneurs. That’s the problem. And once their money is raised, there’spressure to invest, invest, invest, and be more fee-dependent than successdependent.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, maybe the economic downturn is going to solve that problem. Jamieson: It will certainly help, yes, sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Are there other things that you’d like to say about how venture capital is donenow, as opposed to how it was when you were practicing it? Jamieson: Well, I think the biggest problem is that the supply of capital has been elastic.The supply of capable entrepreneurs is not elastic; it doesn’t rise to make useof available capital. So a larger percentage of capital gets invested inrelatively less successful or less competent entrepreneurs.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It’s a matter of people having ideas that can build businesses, and there’s justa certain level of that competency, and it’s not in sync with the money? Jamieson: No, not at all. And you say, is there any evidence of that? Well, I just point tothe rates of return; they’re lower because there’s too much capital. There’s anoversupply of capital versus entrepreneurial competence.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is it too simplistic to say that that goes back to the time of the bubble? Jamieson: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It appeared that there was endless money so you got all these people cominginto the field.  Jamieson: Right, sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So then you could also conclude that there must also have been people comingin who didn’t have the background or the experience, right? Jamieson: A lot of people who did not have track records or experience were able toraise venture capital funds. It was just a big demand for venture capital fundsbased on what happened in the eighties and nineties.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I think of Al Gore— Jamieson: You think of—Al Gore?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Al Gore, who was brought in as a general partner at Kleiner Perkins. And anumber of scientists that I’ve talked to about their science have since becomeventure capitalists. Jamieson: Well, Al Gore isn’t a scientist. [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, yes, I think of him first and foremost as a politician. Jamieson: Yes, he is.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is this legitimate, in the sense of adding real value to a partnership? Jamieson: You mean turning politicians into venture capitalists?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. Does it really add much, or is it just window dressing that brings a lot ofmedia attention? Jamieson: I think it shows an increasing tendency to depend on influence versus otherfactors in the business.I have a question to ask you when we start the next tape! Since we’re on thesubject of Al Gore! [laughter][End Audio File 3] <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It is still July 28, 2009, and I’m still talking with Mr. Jamieson. Jamieson: Well, we were talking about Al Gore and venture capital. And my nextquestion to you was going to be, do you believe in global warming? [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I do, and I’m certainly not able to tell you from a highly technical basiswhy I do. But I do know people in the field who have the statistics that theyclaim show that, while the planet has had cycles of warming and cooling, theway the cycles are behaving now are abnormal and that there is a humancomponent to it. And I believe that. Jamieson: All right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You don’t? Jamieson: Well, what I believe is that the Al Gore version of global warming iscompletely fallacious. I think it’s another measure of monumental humanconceit in thinking that we have the extent of influence on climate that Gorewould claim that we do. I don’t think we do at all. I just would go back andmake the point that in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, Greenland waswarmer than it is today. Well, why is it colder? Well, not because of anythingwe’ve done, because all we’ve had since then is a significant amount in recentcenturies of expansion of industrial activity at the sacrifice of agriculturalactivity. So I believe that global warming or cooling is much more influenced bythings over which man has no control, like sunspot activity, for instance.Sunspot activity now is at a recent all-time low, and generally that’s been agood predictor, over a few hundred years, of global cooling. In fact, last yearwas a year of very heavy snowfall in Europe; there’s a lot of mention ofwhat’s happening to the Arctic ice cap. I don’t see any mention of the fact thatthe Antarctic ice cap is expanding. A few years ago I was climbing on theglacier [Perito] Moreno, in Argentina—it’s in the southern hemisphere, ofcourse, and it’s a glacier that’s expanding, not shrinking. So I don’t know. Iwould say I don’t know, but I do think that there’s a lot of conceit inoverestimating how much influence human activity can have.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, without defending Gore—and I’m not in any position where I couldeven if I wished to—I think he was behaving as a politician much more than as a scientist. And he had, for whatever reason, decided to make globalwarming his crusade, and he wanted to make a political point. Jamieson: Oh I think he happens to have made tens of millions of dollars with this idea,so I have to congratulate him on his entrepreneurial skills. But I just think it’sall wrong.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, Mr. Jamieson, he’s now one of your own, as a so-called venturecapitalist. [chuckling] Jamieson: Well, I’m not a venture capitalist! See, he’s come in, and I, ten years ago, left.[laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All right, never the twain shall meet.I want to get back, though, to the discussion we were just having off-tape. Icondense it to your statement that there’s too much money in current venturecapital for its own good. Jamieson: Too much money supply relative to the entrepreneurial supply.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So, the question is, how do we increase the innovative power, theentrepreneurial power of the United States of America? Jamieson: Well, we start off by increasing the educational standards. Without that as afoundation, all else I think is hopeless. I think the K-12 public educationalsystem is an absolute disaster. I think I knew more as an eighth grade graduatethan many high school graduates know today. We had much more effectivestandards applied and much more emphasis on basics when I was in grammarschool than the poor children—when I say poor I mean educationally poor notfinancially pool—the poor children have today. There’s too much money spent on administration, spent on multiple languageprograms, which is nonsense. The glue that made America work as a meltingpot was language. Different languages split culture; they do not unite it. It’s agreat fallacy. I know when my grandfather, my mother’s father, emigratedfrom Germany in 1883, one of the great initial emphases was to learn English.Well, by providing instruction in other languages— My mother didn’t speakEnglish till she started kindergarten. So she was basically made to learnEnglish as soon as she started school, which was great. She never complainedto me about it. In fact, by the time I was around, she pretty much lost a lot ofher German. I think I’ve mentioned, I took four years of German in high school, and I lost it. I really only took it because I had to take some language.It’s just pretty unusual that we were reading Goethe in German during WorldWar II.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All right. Shall we turn to specific companies? Jamieson: Sure. Whatever you’d like.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You mentioned Tigon, which is a games company. Jamieson: No, Tigon was a pager company.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But when you look on the Website now, there are a whole bunch of games. Ordo I have the wrong company? Jamieson: I think you do. The short story is Tigon was founded by a technologist. It gotinto trouble by basically— Pagers are rented not sold, or were. They are anobsolete product now. No one that I know of uses pagers. Why should one?So the company was a difficult cash-flow business to manage. There was agreat churn rate, and the monthly rentals were low; there was a trackingproblem—where is the pager? That is a company asset, not a sold asset. Anyhow, one of my limited partners had invested— It was obvious that thecompany was just going to go bankrupt if something wasn’t done. He askedme to invest and go on the board. I said I would. We fairly rapidly found anew marketing-oriented CEO with some business school skills, worked withhim, and about a year-and-a-half later the company was sold to Ameritech fora very favorable price. So it was a relatively fast in-and-out effort, but we hadvery frequent board meetings and the company was in Texas.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you think that you saved the company? Jamieson: I think I and some other board changes brought about the managementchanges that were needed, yes. We needed a stronger hand than the previousboard had had. I think that probably the founder had a number of his friendson the board, and they didn’t really recognize the cash-flow problems. So wehad no grandiose plan to grow a huge company in a short time, because thatreally can’t be done in a rental business. There are other examples of failuresof low-value products going way back to things like IBM DiskPacs. Theywere rented for $15 a month or so, and it was a hopeless business model, <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, explain why you can’t build a big company on a rental product. Jamieson: Oh, because the revenue for each product shipped is not the value of thatproduct; it’s some fraction of the value based on the rental rate. If a product isworth $1,000, it might rent for $50 a month, so instead of getting $1,000 whenyou manufacture a product, you get $50. It doesn’t work for very long.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You spoke of the limited partner. Would you never have made that investmentif it had been left up to you, knowing that it was based on a rental product? Jamieson: [pause to think] Yes, because I knew of the problem years before with IBMDiskPacs, which were impossible for anyone to engage in renting other thanIBM.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What do you do in the case, as you were describing, where there are friends orcolleagues of the questionable CEO on the board? Am I not right in thinkingthat any decision made has to be by majority vote? Jamieson: Sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So did you have to do a lot of persuading? Jamieson: It’s the golden rule operating: He who has the gold makes the rules. [<|endoftext|>
Interviewerlaughs] So if a company is running out of money, you have a lot of influence.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So did it really come down to that? Jamieson: Sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you have to threaten to withdraw? Jamieson: No, I was not an investor. I came in as a part of a refinancing in theorganization.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see, because I couldn’t understand how this investment happened in the firstplace.  Jamieson: Well, I was certainly influenced by our lead limited partner with whom I hadhad years of friendship, having already money at risk. But the terms of thenew investment were favorable enough to make it worthwhile doing, at leasttaking a risk.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Thinking of the boards of companies in which you are an investor— Jamieson: Well, there are none now, except charitable boards or cultural boards.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you have to resort on occasion to, “I’m an investor in this company, andI’m going to disappear unless you do as I say?” Jamieson: No. The crisis occurs when the company is running out of money. What youcan say is, “Well, unless certain changes are made, we’re not going to give thecompany more money.” So it’s not a matter of threatening to leave; there’s noleverage there. They would say, “Okay. Go ahead.” [laughter] “We don’t needyou and we don’t need your money.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because your investment is already there, and it behooves you to stick with it. Jamieson: That’s right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Anything more about Tigon? Jamieson: No. It was a quick in-and-out story with a very happy ending for all.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Then you mentioned FileNet. When was that founded? Jamieson: 1982.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Tigon was about the same era? You don’t have to be precise. Jamieson: I don’t know when it was founded, but it was an involvement for me that wassometime during the eighties. Since we sold it trade sale, I don’t have thedates in mind.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It doesn’t matter. So FileNet.  Jamieson: FileNet was a company of which I was actually a founder as well as being aninvestor, and that was originally one of the Jamieson and Companyinvestments. But FileNet was started by the former executive vice president ofSycor, the company of which I was COO in the early seventies.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right, I remember. Jamieson: He went through a couple of other affiliations after Sycor and then left acompany called Basic Four, which was in the small business systems marketand asked me work with him in looking around for a company to buy. Well,we soon found that companies that were for sale had some problem, like thetechnology was becoming obsolete. So we came across—I don’t know quite what to call it—an archival records ordata storage company using what we thought were primitive means. FileNetwas started as a means to approach the paperless office. Well, we weren’tsuccessful in getting rid of paper, but we got rid of a lot of it. The product wasa large system using optical disks to provide archival storage of documents. Itstarted in ’82. I had 1 percent of the founders’ shares, for which I agreed to alockup of—I think it was five years—and to be the lead investor and got thecompany financed. I stayed on the board from ’82 to ’94. Ted Smith, who wasthe founder, ran the company very well, but it had a lot of ups and downs. Itwent public in ’87 just at the time of the great market drop of ’87, which wasfortunately a V drop—down fast and up fast.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You wouldn’t have gone public, if you had been able to see that that coming? Jamieson: No. It was a reaction to interest rates going up very rapidly.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see, and so the price of the stock dropped precipitously? Jamieson: Well, it was a difficult time to go public. The lead underwriter I think wasMorgan Stanley. I think the personality involved was Frank Quattrone, whowas very famous as an investment banker. He ran into some legal problemslater on.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] Yes, I remember. Jamieson: But it was the summer of ’87 when FileNet was going public, and I think thatmarket crash occurred in late August or early September. It was very 70dramatic. But that was a difficult climate to begin with. And like many smallcompanies, FileNet’s earnings had a lot of variability. Among other things, wegot sued by the usual people who enter into class action suits againstcompanies for not representing their future prospects accurately, and basicallythey want to be paid to go away. So the person that did that eventually woundup in jail—I mean the lawyer who made that his business.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Made the class action suit. Jamieson: Yes, made a business of class action suits. It turned out he was bribingclaimants and basically creating these cases.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Wow. Jamieson: So we went through things like that. In ’94 the board made the decision tobring in a new CEO. One came from IBM. I’d had a long relationship withSmith; I liked him a lot. I just didn’t want to go through the effort of creating agood working relationship with a new CEO, so I left the board. But in the latenineties the company was acquired by IBM for $1.4 billion, so that turned outwell.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That was all right, and you had founders’ stock. Jamieson: Yes, I had founders’ stock. I and other directors were very involved indiscussing strategy and actions with the management. It was a goodexperience.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: If it was a good experience, management, I’m presuming, was receptive. Jamieson: Sure, yes. Well, they weren’t rolling over at every idea that we had, but it waspossible to have discussions without them getting acrimonious.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Has that been your usual experience? That executives, managers, are receptiveto your advice? Jamieson: Yes, I’d say the worst experience in that way was R2 Systems. It took a yearfor me to convince the board that the CEO was as bad as I thought he was. Inthe first place, he wasn’t truthful, and it was not a happy experience in thatway. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Truthful in the sense of trying to make the company look better than itactually was? Jamieson: Sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And the other board members couldn’t see that? Jamieson: Well, all I can say is they didn’t. [chuckling]Another very active venture investor, Scott Halstead, eventually wound upbecoming chairman of the company. Another board member was interimpresident, and we found a very good marketing-oriented executive who hadbeen with a U.S. division of Siemens, who came in. We wound up selling thecompany to Hologic for between $200-$300 million dollars. The product wasa computer-based image-analyzing system that replaced second readers formammograms and allowed much more accurate early detection of breastcancer. And I think it’s the current standard of care. If I were a woman, Iwould not go to a mammographic center that did not have an R2 system.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I will take that advice in mind.You mentioned underwriters, and we haven’t talked about underwriting at all.Who makes the decision about which underwriter for which IPO? Jamieson: The board does.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And why one over another? Jamieson: It’s based on track record of successful IPOs of small companies; it’s based onresearch coverage in the future. It’s more of an intuitive decision thananything else, I guess I would say.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Intuition again. Do you favor certain underwriters over others? Do you havefavorites? Jamieson: Well, the business has changed so in just the last few years. Some companiesthat were effective are gone; some were acquired. Merrill Lynch was acquiredby Bank of America. So many that I would have felt favorably about in thepast are either gone, merged, acquired, or they would have no interest in small IPOs. Again, there’s been a tremendous scale-up of capital in the investmentbanking business as well as the venture business.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So is it true that some investment banks can’t be bothered with small IPOs? Jamieson: Sure, always has been. In fact, I would have favored a medium or modest-sizeone in the past, versus a very large one, because small companies tend to getlost in very large investment banking firms.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It would take a certain kind of expertise in the underwriter in taking a GM— Jamieson: Oh, that was a very good example. [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, that wasn’t the best, was it! [laughter] Jamieson: No, I’m just kidding you. No, they have to be risk takers. Sure. Much morethan doing a large deal. But on the other hand, the commissions are muchhigher for initial IPOs than for established companies—maybe twice as much.So there is money to be made.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What are you looking for when you’re considering taking a company public? Jamieson: Well, has it gotten to the stage where its revenues and earnings are reasonablypredictable? Sometimes we think they are, but then they turn out not to be asin the case of FileNet. FileNet systems represented a substantial capitalinvestment on the part of companies, so their revenue stream was very lumpy.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And the condition of the market, I’m assuming, as FileNet also illustrated.You hit it wrong, as it turned out. Jamieson: Yes, that’s right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Anything else that goes into your thinking? Jamieson: Well, it’s confidence in management and management’s ability to run a largercompany— <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right, with a lot of public scrutiny. Jamieson: —at the time it goes public.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I would think that’d be a huge step for an executive. Jamieson: It’s a big responsibility.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Also I’m thinking of the new public face and the public reporting, and all ofthat. Jamieson: That’s right. Fortunately I think it’s under-realized by most CEOs. [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Or they’d never do it? Jamieson: But we don’t tell them.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, but they stand to gain too. Jamieson: Yes. Their focus is on what their stock is going to be worth as opposed towhat they have to pay for it, pay for it in terms of responsibility.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You don’t necessarily go into that in great detail? Jamieson: No. It’s something you can’t explain very well anyhow. And how it’s viewedis oftentimes a function of the individual. There are certainly some that havebeen CEOs of companies that have gone public without much sense ofresponsibility to the public shareholders. So it’s difficult to convey.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All right. LDT [Laser Diagnostic Technologies]. Jamieson: All right. It was another example of a— Well, several examples. Thecompany got, I think, bad advice from its board in that it had an expensiveproduct. This was a laser for analyzing nerve bundle in eyes, a laser system.This was sold to ophthalmologists. It was initially sold, but then someone,either in the company or on the board, got the idea that—“Oh, we could rentthese.” Well, I don’t know who the originator was, but the board agreed to it. Well, immediately, the company started to incur a big, negative cash flow.Well, of course.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You could have told them that. Jamieson: That’s what happens when you rent products—expensive products or productsthat—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you advising against renting? Jamieson: No, I wasn’t on the board. One of my original partners was, who had reallygeneral business competence but, let’s say, not in the quantitative sense oflooking at what happens to a balance sheet when you rent rather than sell. At the same time, as we found out later, the CEO as well as running thecompany had been working on a startup of a new company at the expense ofour company. So we didn’t think too well of that. [chuckling]In the meantime, before we even knew this, we had recruited a much betterCEO who was also very good at listening to the board. Oh—and the boardcompletely changed at that time. When the company had to be refinanced, hecame to us with this rental scheme. We said, “No, thanks,” at Sigma. But thenwe eventually did invest because the company had to be reengineered. Theboard had 100 percent turnover, and we pointed out the fallacy of the rentalconcept, although there were also a lot of product-quality problems. Weprovided advice on how to do the reengineering that was required withoutanother financing being required. The quality problems got turned around; thecompany stopped renting; the returns due to quality problems decreased. At the time I got on the board, the other investors were willing to sell thecompany, would be delighted to sell the company for $10 million. After, Ithink a year and a half to two years, there was enough progress in solving allthe problems so that we sold it to [Carl] Zeiss Meditec for $28 million.Basically, we just wanted to get out of it because, even though it was getting alot better, there were still plenty of problems ahead. So that was a niceturnaround.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Good. We’re running out of time, and there are some other things that I wantto ask you. Jamieson: Go right ahead. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: One of them being the importance, or not, of California as a setting. Yourearly career was on the East Coast. So I would be interested in hearing yourthoughts on how not only venture capital, but how innovation and newcompany growth happen in both areas of our country. Jamieson: Well, it didn’t happen as rapidly on the East Coast or on the scale that it didhere. I think early on I may have commented about the differences betweenMIT and Stanford. For some reason MIT never was able to mechanize thebusiness-generation activity that Stanford did, and I mentioned ProfessorTerman at Stanford as being a leading light, and making that happen, andrealizing how important it was. Also, on the West Coast there was theexample of Hewlett-Packard, which was a private company for really quite afew years in context of modern timescale, that turned into a very large andvery successful public company.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did it become more or less a model for a high-tech company? Jamieson: That’s right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: The East Coast has Route 128, an industrial area. Jamieson: Right. But in total revenue in employment, I don’t think it’s nearlyapproached the scale of activity here.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What about the type of activity that occurs along Route 128 compared toSilicon Valley? Jamieson: Well, years ago there were more manufacturing companies there rather thannow, where I think it’s mainly a research-oriented economy. Athough theincrease in biotech companies, in more recent years, has changed that and hasbeen more favorable. But biotech companies never employ the legions ofpeople that large manufacturing companies do.On the other hand, small companies are much more responsible for increasesin employment than large companies are. Large companies are always tradingoff labor expense for capital investment, and they much prefer to replace laborwith capital. Small companies are responsible for most of the employmentgrowth in the United States.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Some people make a big deal about the culture of Silicon Valley, with all theadjectives that go along with it. Do you, having familiarity with both areas, see any validity in the contrast? I’m thinking of Route 128 as compared toSilicon Valley, if that’s the way you want to address it. Jamieson: I would say that the culture in the East is more conservative. I see manyexamples of young people here with much more money than sense. [laughter]What we call the Google kids are buying up perfectly nice houses in Athertonfor very high prices, tearing them down, and building what my wife and I calltrophy houses, which make no sense.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, trophy houses or McMansions. Jamieson: Yes. Ihave run several times into a young woman walking a dog that I like alot—I like the dog. The woman is okay too. [<|endoftext|>
Interviewer laughs] At least tell mywife that! [chuckling] Jamieson: The woman was complaining bitterly about a young couple who bought sucha perfectly good house near her, tore it down, and built a 12,000 square foothouse. And there are two of them. So does that make any sense? I don’t thinkso. In fact, fortunately we had the time or the need to design our house twice,and the second time around we made it smaller, and I’m very glad that we did.It’s less than 4,000 square feet. I forget what it is exactly, but it was good tomake it smaller.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. Smaller—there’s some adage about that. Jamieson: That’s a house that was ahead of its time.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Meaning in what? Jamieson: In conservatism and low-maintenance design.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I think you would admit that you are a conservative person. So how has itbeen to be in a less conservative place than where you were born and bred? Jamieson: Fine. [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That’s very expansive! You seem very East Coast to me. Jamieson: Yes, I probably am. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So there hasn’t been a disjuncture? Jamieson: Well, we actually lived in Los Angeles for about four years.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, that’s even worse, isn’t it? Jamieson: Yes, it is. Although as I think I mentioned, we found a suburb that was moretraditional.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What about philanthropy? Jamieson: Oh I’m very active. [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I know about the opera because there are placards on your wall. Jamieson: Well, we support the museum just as much.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Which museum? Jamieson: The Fine Arts Museums [of San Francisco].<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: The de Young. Jamieson: Yes, the de Young and Legion of Honor.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Good for you. Jamieson: We have a gallery there that’s named for us. We’ve given three or fourpaintings to the museum. We have one on loan, so we’re very interested. Wecollect art.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I see some of that on your wall here. Jamieson: Yes. Dürer is the earliest, and our latest is probably early twentieth centuryimpressionist. We have more art than we can hang, so we circulate it. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, that’s a nice problem to have. Jamieson: Well, we don’t have a big house! [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I think I’m coming to the end. What would you like to say after all myquestions? Jamieson: Well, in terms of recommendations on lifestyle or personal attitude it’s: Bemore than you seem to be.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I thank you. Jamieson: And don’t believe your own press notices! [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I thank you. Jamieson: Thank you
Interviewer: It is May 12, 2009, and it’s about 10:00 and we’re starting our first interview.Mr. Edwards—would you start way back with your grandparents, if that’sindeed the place to start? Edwards: Sure. Well, my father’s grandfather was in the Civil War; he died in that warand left his family with very little after the war, and his widow came west.They were in South Carolina, and she came west looking for somethingsomeplace so they could settle and do something, have some money to startsomething. And she got as far as northwestern Louisiana in a little town nowcalled Noble, which is just a wide place in the road; it’s just a nothing. Andshe had three sons, and they were with her, and one of those sons was mygrandfather. He had—wait a minute, let me get this straight [pause to think]—one of those sons was my grandfather. It went from my great-grandmother inSouth Carolina to her and her three sons in Louisiana. One of those sons married and had eight children. There were two boys andsix girls, and one of those boys, the youngest boy, second youngest child, wasmy father Leland Tabor Edwards. He had the benefits of a fifth-gradeLouisiana education. He learned to read, he learned to write, and he learned todo mathematics, fifth grade in backwoods Louisiana. He was born in 1885,and backwoods Louisiana it wasn’t much of an education. At a fairly earlyage, he went to work for a logging company, Pickering Lumber, in Louisiana,sharpening saws, axes. He ended up running the company store. He wasbright; he ran the company store in a company town where workers were paidin scrip. They used the scrip to go to the company store to buy whatever theyneeded.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And it was the lumber company that owned the town? Edwards: It was Pickering Lumber Company; they owned the town, owned the store,owned the timber around it. He worked there for a number of years runningthis store, and then he left and started a store of his own in backwoodsLouisiana. And he had three stores eventually, but he was still young. He wasin his twenties at this point. He was born in ‘85, and so this was sometimebefore 1915. His little sister, my aunt Mary Irene, married a man named Cleve Rogers.Cleve Rogers was a roughneck in the oil fields. A roughneck is a man thatworks on the floor of a drilling rig. It’s dirty, dangerous work. And his rig, therig he was working on, was up in, I guess, probably in northern Texas orfarther north in Louisiana. My father was going up to St. Louis on a buying trip for his little stores, and he stopped by this rig. And my aunt and my UncleCleve were living in a tent near the rig, which is what the work crew did. Hestopped by to see them on the way up to St. Louis and then on the way backstopped again, and Uncle Cleve was trying to get him to buy an oil rig and goin the oil business. Uncle Cleve talked him into it. His little sister didn’t like itat all, and she cried and cried when he did this. My father then sold his stores,bought an oil rig, and the two of them started out drilling oil wells. That wasway back in the teens. In 1921, they had a number of rigs. They’d expanded and the company wasprospering. In about 1920 there was a major discovery in California, whichturned out to be Signal Hill, a big oil field. Little in area, but huge reserves. Ithad 3,500 feet of pay sand in it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And where is it? Edwards: Long Beach.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, Long Beach. Edwards: My father came out to have a look at it and wired my uncle and said, “Sendme a drilling rig and a crew.” He said, “We can do very well out here!” Andthey were competing against people that were not nearly as aggressive anddidn’t work nearly as well. They were competing against big companies thatwere running their own rigs in a very bureaucratic fashion. They did very welland moved the whole operation to California. In 1923 or so, my Uncle Clevebecame ill, sold his part of the company to my father. My father was notmarried; ’23 he was about 38 years old. So he took over the whole company and ran it. It was a pretty good sizecompany. He had seventeen rigs and 500 employees working for him. In1928, with no prescience about what was going to happen in the economicworld, he decided that he wanted a vacation. He’d never had a vacation, andhe wanted to do a little traveling, and he wanted to build a home. And so hesold his company. He didn’t like to delegate very well; he thought he could doeverything better himself and he probably could. So he sold his wholecompany in 1928 just before the Depression. He did what he wanted to do—built a home and did a little traveling and lost a lot of money during thatDepression, but we still lived comfortably. So that was the story of my fatherand my grandfather and my great-grandfather. My mother, Katharine Louise Knauf, on the other hand, came fromMinnesota, and she was the daughter of a farmer, and the farmer was a mannamed Henry Knauf, and Henry Knauf was of German extraction. Our records go as far back as, I don’t know, Dutch Peter Knauf, or something. Mymother’s family was a family of six children. They had three boys and threegirls, though at one time seven, because I had an Uncle George who died in anaccident back in the early part of the twentieth century. They were born on afarm; my mother and all those kids had to go into a nearby town calledWinona, southeastern Minnesota, to school. So my mother went to a littleschool in Winona and then went to Winona State Teachers College; she wasborn in 1894, and so this was the very early part of the twentieth century—Winona State Teachers College along with her two sisters. They all wentthere. No—the nearest two in age went there; my Aunt Mary went to WinonaState Teachers. Aunt Mary and Mother decided, in about 1921, that they were going to go toCalifornia. They were going to leave this little town in Minnesota, a littlefarming town, and come to California where the opportunities were better andthe weather was better. And they were just young girls, and they came toCalifornia and taught. My mother taught in a school in Beverly Hills and myaunt was in a school in Los Angeles. And my mother and father met about thattime—a boy from Louisiana with no education and this girl that had a collegeeducation. It was unusual. They were married in 1924; my brother was bornin ’26 and I was born in ’28. Is that what you wanted to hear?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, that’s what I wanted to hear. Edwards: Anything more on that?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I want to know what it was like growing up in your family and howmuch emphasis, if any, was put on education, with a father who had a fifthgrade education. Edwards: Well, he recognized how important education was because he was a veryuneducated man. He was in circles that were highly educated in those days. SoI’m sure he put heavy emphasis on education, and my mother, of course, wasinterested in education. So I was afforded whatever education I wanted,whatever education I could achieve. How much of my life do you want to gointo?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I’d like to hear a little bit more about what it was like growing up in thatfamily. Edwards: I grew up during the Depression. I was born in 1928, and the Depressionstarted a year later. And so far the whole community that we were in, I meaneverybody, it was the Depression. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you in Long Beach? Edwards: Long Beach, California. They’d settled in Long Beach.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And you were living in the house that your father had— Edwards: We were living in the house my father built, yes. I was raised in that house. Itwas a lovely California Colonial home in Long Beach, and very comfortable,very lovely home.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now was Long Beach, in the twenties, dominated by the oil industry? Edwards: It was a principal industry in Long Beach. It was a place where people from the Midwest came to retire because theweather was good and the beach was fabulous, so we had a lot ofMidwesterners. The biggest event in the whole town every year was the IowaPicnic.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Iowa! Edwards: It was held in the park downtown. A small town; Los Angeles was next doorabout twenty miles away, and no freeways, of course, it was all surface roads.But Long Beach never really grew up because it was next to the city. If peoplereally were serious about buying something, they went to Los Angeles to buyit. And it had a kind of a truncated business district, because it was right onthe ocean. The town started on the ocean and the downtown part was on theocean, but it really only had 180 degrees of space because the rest of it wasocean. So it was kind of a funny little town, very provincial, very inwardlylooking.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And a town unto itself. Edwards: Yes, it was distinct from Los Angeles.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You didn’t feel as though you were an Angeleno. Edwards: No, no, there was a lot of open space between Los Angeles and Long Beach.Farms. There was the big Del Amo [Estate Company] properties that were land grant properties between Long Beach and Los Angeles. So it was a verykind of provincial little place.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, you, being born in ’28 probably can’t remember the Depression. Edwards: Oh I remember the Depression.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Can you? Edwards: Oh sure. Yes, I can remember darned socks and patched pants. We livedcomfortably, and we were in pretty good shape compared to most people, butI had many schoolmates that were not in good shape. We didn’t really thinkabout it that way. It was just the world. And that world was fabulous.Southern California in the twenties and the early thirties was wonderful. It hada little smog, which was particularly bad when there was freezing weather andthey smudged in the orange groves. Orange County was all orange trees.There was a little town out there, Santa Ana, but there was just all orangetrees. On a cold night they’d go out and light these smudge pots which burnedheavy fuel, and [gave off] a very dark smoke, and so forth. But it wasparadise! It was a wonderful—a beautiful beach and then you could look up atthe snow-capped mountains. If you were the right age, you could surf and skithe same day, really. It was a fabulous place to grow up. I just remember it asparadise. And I think the population of California then was, I would guess,maybe 7 million or something? It’s now in excess of 35 million. Hugechanges.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. And particularly in that area. Edwards: In Los Angeles, yes. Huge.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, tell me a little about your brother. Were you close to him? Edwards: My brother Paul Henry Edwards was twenty-one months older, and we wereclose but competitive. [laughter] He tended to pound on me occasionally, andI gave back. [chuckling] But he was a very nice, very good-looking youngman.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What did he end up doing?  Edwards: Well, he was born in ’26, and so in ’43 he was seventeen years old. The warwas going on, and he had wanted to go in the air force but was color blind andthey wouldn’t take him. And so he ended up going to the Great Lakes NavalTraining [Center] School in Chicago. And he was interested in being involvedin electronics in that school. In boot camp, in the winter of ’44 and early ’45,he caught pneumonia. He didn’t know it was pneumonia. There was no curefor pneumonia; you didn’t have any antibiotics in those days. He was about aweek or so from being through with boot camp and being able to go home,and I just know that he kept right on going. He didn’t want to have to get intosick bay during his leave, and he died.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh my God. Edwards: It was in January of ’45. It was a terrible shock to my family. A terrible shockto my parents and everybody. So anyway—then I was the only son at thatpoint.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you feel the burden of that? Edwards: The burden. Well, yes, feel the burden—yes, there was a big burden. Mymother had a very difficult time. She never really recovered from it. She wasparticularly affected and she turned to religion. She felt like she’d had acontact with the divine, and she was very interested in religion for the rest ofher life. It was hard adjusting my world to her world. It was kind of having afoot in two different places. So anyway, in my life that was a burden,definitely a burden. And then my father took it very, very hard, of course, aswell. But he weathered it much, much better than my mother. He was a fineman, and I admire him greatly for what he achieved. But he was—anyway,that was what happened and that was a great burden, a great burden. I didn’tfeel like it was a burden, but that’s what happened to me and I did it and livedthrough it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Where were you when he died? Edwards: Well, I’d been shipped off to New Mexico Military Institute. I was doingextremely well in Polytechnic High School in Long Beach. I was straight-Aand California Scholarship Federation, or whatever it was, and involved in allsorts of social things and having a great time. My father had heard about thisschool, New Mexico Military Institute. In all honesty, I had a really beautifulgirlfriend [laughter]. She turned out to be the homecoming queen at USC andthen married Frank Gifford. My father, I think, was afraid that I’d dosomething that I regretted, and I never would have, no possible way. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You mean get married and that would be it? Edwards: No, getting married is completely out, and having a child out of wedlock wasout of the question. No possible way. But anyway—so that could have beenthe reason, or it could have been because New Mexico Military Institute wasrun by the army. It was a National Guard school. It was a school in theSouthwest in Roswell, New Mexico, and it had a lot of kids that would comein from ranches all around the Southwest, a place where they couldn’t get agood education.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: My father went there. Edwards: New Mexico Military Institute?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes! Edwards: I regard it as a penal colony! But anyway.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Really! I never talked to him about it, unfortunately. Edwards: Well, it was—they practiced the same practices that they do at Annapolis.And they had corporal hazing the first year you were there. I think atAnnapolis they call them plebes and in New Mexico they called them rats. Iwent in as a rat and I had these little kids, who were tenth graders—I was ajunior in high school at that point. I was in the eleventh grade, I guess. Andlittle kids—they had the ability to give me corporal punishment. It was not anice place. I didn’t like it at all. It had, I suppose, many useful aspects in therest of my life, but it was tough discipline. And it was a very strict militaryschool.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And what about the education? Edwards: Adequate.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was this through high school? Edwards: No, just the two years for me, the last two years of high school. It was a fouryear school but I was in Long Beach for the first two years. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Okay, the last two. Edwards: But you came out of there a lieutenant in the cavalry. Not out of high school,but after two years of junior college you came out as a lieutenant in thecavalry, so that was one of the things he was thinking about and the otherthing was—possibly—I’m just second guessing. He never mentioned a word,but she was a beautiful girl. [chuckling]. Anyway, so I went there. And was it good for me? I had nothing to do butstudy and sports, really very little to do but that. So I studied. We had acompulsory study hall every night. And we had to be in our rooms and wewere observed in our rooms. So I’d do my homework, and then I’d be sittingthere at my desk and I’d do it again! So my grades were very good there, butwhen it came time to go to college, I’d really had very little—there wasnobody there that really gave me any advice on college. My father, of course,wasn’t really able to give me advice, and my mother—they knew nothing, notmuch about Harvard and Princeton and so forth. So I applied to Caltech andStanford. Caltech didn’t have the SAT. They had their own entrance exam,and I took that. I couldn’t even read it! They had math and physics and all thesciences that I had never come into contact with at all at New Mexico. So Ididn’t get into Caltech, obviously. [chuckling] There were problems on thattest that I couldn’t even understand. I had no idea how to go about solvingthem.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, it was a very—still is—a very elite science-oriented school. Edwards: A great school, a great school. But I did get into Stanford, and that was it! Iapplied to two colleges, and one of them I didn’t get close to getting into andthe other one was easier. So I went to Stanford and then went to Harvard.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now did you have any idea what you wanted to major in? Edwards: No, I was drawn toward engineering and science, and so I ended up as apetroleum engineer. I got involved in engineering, but I came from an oiltown. The people that lived on the street that we lived on were mostly oilpeople, and I had a mentor who was a geologist in the oil fields. So that was—I sort of naturally gravitated. I became a petroleum engineer. And I alwaysthought I would learn the business and then go out and start trying to developproduction on my own.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Meaning creating a—  Edwards: Drilling oil wells.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, but creating your own company around it. Edwards: Right. I wanted to work for myself. From a very early age I wanted to workfor myself.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, wasn’t that an influence of your father? Edwards: Oh yes. Oh my father had great influence on me! One—he was a man ofprinciple, and honesty and integrity were important to him. I never heard himswear. We did a lot of fishing together, and the worst thing I ever heard himsay was goddawgit if he hooked himself in the ear or something like that.[laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was he a religious man? Edwards: No, well, he was a Christian. My mother was a Catholic; my father was aProtestant. And he was irreligious and he didn’t attend church regularly. Andmy mother didn’t attend church after my father and mother were married. Myearly training in religion was at the Episcopal Church in Long Beach. Inensuing years I attended many different churches and looked around, and soforth. But what was the question again?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, we’re talking about Stanford, and I’m just looking at when you werethere—it was two years after the war was over. Edwards: I went there in ’46.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Forty-seven by my calculation. Edwards: I was there for five years. I went in ’46.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh so ’46 right after the war. Edwards: Right after the war. The biggest entering freshman class that Stanford had forthe next twenty-five years or thirty years was that class. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because of the GI Bill? Edwards: It was the GI Bill and the guys coming back from war. So Stanford went outof its way to try to bring as many of those guys in as they could without justdivorcing themselves from the public high school system or the high schoolsystem. And so there were 1400 or 1500 people in our entering freshmanclass.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What did that do to your education? Edwards: It richened it. Yes. I joined a fraternity there, and it was about half veteransand half non-veterans. It was with the more mature people although youwouldn’t really know it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Who knew what they wanted to get out of education? Edwards: Well, they’d been out in the world, but they were glad to be alive, and theywere having a really good time, and they were working. And they werelooking forward to getting out of college and getting married and having afamily and starting their lives. In those days you got married at twenty totwenty-five.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, you talked off-tape about Stanford’s influence in Silicon Valley and[Frederick E.] Terman and that whole story. How much were you aware ofwhat Stanford was doing? Edwards: Not aware. Well, it was ’46. Silicon Valley didn’t really start until the latefifties. At the very beginning, you might say there was something like SiliconValley. You had Hewlett-Packard and the Varian brothers and a few othercompanies around, but that was the beginning. When I was at Stanford,Silicon Valley was all prune and apricot groves. It was beautiful going downthere in the spring and seeing all these fruit trees blossoming.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I can’t remember whether Terman was provost at that time. Edwards: He probably was later—he became the provost. He was the dean of the Schoolof Engineering, I think.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And he was already reaching out into industry, was he not?  Edwards: Well, he would encourage Bill Hewlett and Dave Packard to start HewlettPackard. And they were both students of his. That was a very seminal thing inSilicon Valley. That was one of the things that I think marked the beginningof it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That was after your time as an undergraduate? Edwards: I think they started in—I want to say ’39? Now can that be?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I think you’re right. It was before your time. [rustling sounds] Sorry,I’m hitting the microphone in my enthusiasm! [chuckling] Edwards: It was before my time. But they were starting. They were just making theirfirst instrumentation devices.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And an undergraduate wouldn’t be paying attention. Edwards: I didn’t pay any attention. Come on! I was pretty unsophisticated. I had comefrom two sort of Victorian-type parents. I was not a highly sophisticatedperson but I did enjoy my engineering and my education. First I spent fouryears, basically, mostly engineering. It had a lot of requirements and stuff.And then I spent a fifth year there taking all the courses that I’d heard aboutfor the first four years but couldn’t take because I didn’t have the time anddidn’t really know about them. But I took philosophy and history and actuallyI took a course in Music 1 and a course in Art 1 which have been immenselyenriching to my life. Well, as I say, I took some literature; I took a marvelouscourse from Marge [Margery] Bailey, who was a renowned Shakespeareanteacher. She was a fabulous teacher, and it was an experience being in herclass. I did that sort of thing for an extra year and rounded out my education.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That seems to me quite amazing, considering where you came from. I wouldthink the more routine path would have been, all right, I’ll get my degree, getout there, get a job, form my company, because that’s what your backgroundhad pretty much been. Edwards: Well, to tell you the truth, I had one course that I hadn’t taken that I neededfor a degree in petroleum engineering, and it was a useless course to me. Itwas petrology. Petrology is the study of igneous and volcanic rocks—notsedimentary. [chuckling] The whole petroleum industry is sedimentary rock.This was totally a— And I had that course to take, and basically, in all honesty, I went back to Stanford for that one course and spent a year, whichwas a great year.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you might as well fill it up with courses. Edwards: Well, I didn’t have to spend a year there, but it meant that missing class atHarvard when it started in September. So I did spend a year and because Ireally wanted to. I’d been hearing about history courses and literature coursesand stuff for four years, and I hadn’t been able to take them, and so I tookthem and enjoyed that immensely.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How did a petroleum engineering degree help or not in what was to come? Edwards: Well, one, just the technical stuff. You learn a whole new language when youtake physics and chemistry and so forth. It was a whole new language that youlearned on the various engineering courses. And also, I think the discipline ofhaving answers, not essay-type answers but the answers is good training. Alsoit’s a hindrance, because I’ve always wanted to have the answer, and theanswer in venture capital—there is no the answer.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did that bother you? Edwards: Yes. I like—it’s comforting to have an answer that you know is right. Thenalways to be sort of in a never-never land is—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, then I could ask, and I know we’re leaping ahead—why did you chooseventure capital? A discipline with no definite answer. Edwards: I didn’t choose venture capital! Venture capital chose me. It wasserendipitous!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Okay. [chuckling] Edwards: And I was—Standard [Oil] of California. I went to work for Standard of Calbecause they would drill more oil wells in a year than I would drill myself infive years, ten years. And I wanted to learn how to drill wells and completewells and so forth. I needed to learn the tools of my trade going intoproduction. And after I’d been in the field for three-and-a-half years—and bythe way, I was hired by Standard of Cal at Harvard, and they could have sentme anyplace. I didn’t ask for anything—and they sent me back to the L.A. Basin, which was terrific! I went back to my own home—I went back andslept in my own bed!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And that was just chance that they did that? Edwards: Just chance, yes. I mean, they had a big operation down there, and that’swhere they wanted me and they put me there. And so after three-and-a-halfyears they decided they wanted me at the headquarters, and they were kind ofmoving me along. So I responded and came to the headquarters. I was marriedat that point; I had one child with a second child almost here. So I moved,came up here, and told my wife to pick a place to live, and I would commute.So I did that. She picked a place in Atherton, which happens to be on thenorthern rim of Silicon Valley.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Where you still live? Edwards: Still live.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: In the same house. Edwards: No, not the same house. We built a home there later.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I skipped you past, and I apologize—I skipped you past Harvard BusinessSchool. I think Standard Oil is going to lead directly into venture capital. Edwards: Not directly. [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh all right. But anyway, I want to hear what happened at Harvard BusinessSchool. Edwards: Well, I enjoyed it very much. I think of my years—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But why? Edwards: Why Harvard Business?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes.  Edwards: Well, it was part of my background I wanted to have for building a company.And it’s good training.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But you could have gone to Stanford Business School. Edwards: Well, I’d been at Stanford for five years and I’d done everything you could doat Stanford for five years. Harvard, in those days, was a better school, a morerenowned school. I don’t know if it was better, but it was better known. And itgave me a whole new world. I moved back to the East Coast. I’d never livedon the East Coast; I’d never lived through snowy, cold winters. The wholething was very fresh, but I liked it too!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, what did you get out of the coursework? Edwards: Well, it was all case studies, and you solve problem after problem afterproblem after problem after problem, in various segments of business. Youhave finance and procurement and all sorts of things—business policy and onand on and on.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It sounds very real-world oriented. Was that the idea? Edwards: Yes. This is all casework. So they give you a problem, and you either take itand go to class and discuss it, or you write a paper on it. So you spend yourdays solving business problems. Good training.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, and it proved to be good training? Edwards: Oh I think so. It’s hard to take a formal education and point at some particularthing you’ve done that says this affected it. But I think that whole process ofeducation was terrific. I’ve always enjoyed education. I have never stoppedlearning. It’s very important to me. I’ve had teaching company tapes—if youknow what they are. They’re college-level courses, and I have audiotapes andI have them in my car. I’ve gotten another two degrees, I guess, by justlistening to these tapes!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: On all kinds of subjects? Edwards: And I was listening to one as I drove in here today. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Any particular subject? Edwards: Well, it’s mostly religion, history, mostly those. Philosophy, nothing muchtechnical, although I have one on CDs at home that was on geology. Mygeology goes back to 1950, and there’s been some major changes. Not many,but some major changes since 1950, and it’s been interesting for me to goback and take that course. Plate tectonics was not known in those days, andnow it’s very fundamental.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Exactly. Edwards: Anyway, I love learning, I’ve continued to learn, and I think learning is alifetime process.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Good philosophy. Well, one more question about Harvard Business School.There are a number of people in venture capital who went to HarvardBusiness School. One of the perks is the people you meet and the connectionsthat you establish. Edwards: I have some dear friends from Harvard Business School.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, do you want to talk about how— Edwards: Well, one of the reasons I liked it was that I met some really terrific peoplethere, and I really enjoyed the people a lot, and they were from the variousschools. You got a good look at Harvard-, Princeton-, Yale-type peoplecoming out of those schools, and so forth. But I enjoyed the people a lot. Ihave never particularly benefited from any of the people that I met there, but Ihave a lot of good friends that went to Harvard, and I talk to them and stay intouch with them.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was your intention always to come back to the West Coast? Edwards: In the oil business you go where the oil is, and oil’s in some pretty awfulplaces! [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You were willing to do that?  Edwards: Well, I was willing to start out that way, but I would have preferred being inCalifornia. There was a lot of oil in California, a lot of oil. I could stay hereand work, sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Let’s put your wife in this picture. How did you meet her? Edwards: Which wife? I’ve had two wives.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: The first wife. Edwards: Well, her name was Betty Cree, and she moved in sort of around the cornerfrom where I lived when she was ten. She had two brothers—an older brotherand a younger brother. The older brother was in my brother’s class; theyounger brother was two years younger. A tall, blond, lovely, lovely,woman—intelligent. And I’d known her since I was ten years old! But she hadskipped the second grade, and so I was a year behind her in school. I shouldn’thave been because we were the same age, but she jumped ahead. So she wasalways the girl in the class ahead of me, and we didn’t have anything to dowith each other, particularly, except knew each other well. And then she wentto Scripps College. She wanted to go to Wellesley, but her father and motherthought oh you can’t get that far away! You’ve got to be here. Which Ithought was criminal. She wanted to go to Wellesley. Did I say Scripps?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. Edwards: She went to Scripps but she wanted to go to Wellesley, which would havebeen wonderful for her. She would have benefited enormously. I was in myfifth year at Stanford when she— I guess she got her master’s degree ineducation about that time. No, I think she was out of school three years beforeI was out of school, with a master’s degree. And then I went back to Harvard,and when she was at Stanford we went out a bit. When I was at Harvard wewent out a bit, and we were married the 13th of March 1954. She was abeautiful, wonderful, decent, honest, bright woman.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I can see that you have four children. Is she the mother of all four? Edwards: Yes, she is. And there are six children in that one over there [indicating familyphoto]. I was then single for five years after she died, just before her fiftiethbirthday and my fiftieth birthday, in 1978. I was single for five years lookingfor the lady I’m married to now. And she came with two daughters—and Ididn’t really want to raise any more children. I’d had quite a bit of trouble with my own daughter, and it was not easy, not easy! [chuckling] I thought,oh my God, I can’t do that. But she was so wonderful—hopeless!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So did you at one point have all six children under one roof? Edwards: No, we never did. There was sixteen-and-a-half years’ difference in my ageand Barbara’s, so my older children have sort of an avuncular feeling towardher daughters! And my son Paul sort of feels like their brother, but he’s a gooddeal older. They’re thirty-six and thirty-three, and he’s just about fifty.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: He’s about fifty! Edwards: He will be in September.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: He doesn’t look it. Edwards: Well, it’s a life well-lived, I’d say.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. Is there anything more you want to say about Harvard Business School? Edwards: I enjoyed the whole scene. I liked the community; I liked all the intellectualattractions in it. I loved the Harvard Chapel; it was a great place. Stanford hadhad not much in the way of a chapel. Harvard had a good one, and it hadworld-renowned theologians coming in and preaching the sermon, and soforth. It was wonderful and I loved it. I liked the experience of being in thesnow and the cold and trying to drive around on icy roads. It was anexperience.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You liked that? Edwards: No, I didn’t like that much, but I survived! So did my car.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, you talked a little bit about Standard Oil and how you ended up in LosAngeles by chance. You were there for six years or something like that? Edwards: Six-and-a-half years at Standard of Cal.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you go into that with the idea that this might be your career?  Edwards: Standard of Cal?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. Edwards: No, it seems to me that there are people that are big company people,bureaucratic kind of people, and there are people that are maybe middle-sizecompanies, smaller companies where they’re working with a lot of otherpeople, and there are people that want to be on their own. I’m one of the onesthat wants to be on his own. And I always wanted to run my own show.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You had a family to support and this was a good way to start out? Was thatkind of your thinking for taking the job? Edwards: I didn’t have a family when I went to work for them; I was at Harvard, when Iinterviewed for a job. They could have sent me anywhere, but they sent meback to the L.A. basin.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I guess then my question is if you knew that you wanted to start out on yourown—was that an impossibility at that stage? Edwards: No, it wasn’t impossible.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why didn’t you do that then? Edwards: I wanted to learn.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, okay. [chuckling] Edwards: Drilling an oil well is a complicated thing, and I’d just as soon be trained, andso forth—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh all right, you kind of said that, yes. Edwards: —as opposed to do the whole thing on my own nickel. I mean, it would havebeen very expensive! [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So this was another education sort of.  Edwards: Yes, it was just preparing for what I was going to do.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And it took seven years to get the education that you thought you needed? Edwards: Let me finish my story! [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, all right. I’m sorry. Edwards: Once I was at Standard of Cal and came to the headquarters and was workingat various jobs, it became clearer and clearer to me that the world was awashin oil. Standard of Cal had discovered oil in Saudi Arabia in 1939, and the warinterrupted all that. But as they developed Saudi Arabia—just [a] massivereserve of oil—and the oil business is such that the big companies wouldprefer to produce their own oil, refine their own oil, and market their own oilproducts. There’s some advantages in the production because you have taxpreferences, and the rest of it all goes together very nicely. And so, theywould rather produce and refine, and so forth, their own oil; oil they boughtfrom others was a secondary thing, and if they didn’t need it, they didn’t buyit, and if they needed it they bought it. So the independent producer was kindof a surge thing that would have good years and bad years. That becameapparent to me as I really got into it as I was working in the corporateheadquarters, and so forth. I decided that maybe a career in the oil business was not a good idea becausedeveloping oil in a world where there was lots of oil was not that interesting.And so I decided to change jobs, and I went into money management. I wentwith a national money management firm called Lionel Edie, headquarters inNew York and offices around the country, several offices, and it was to gointo the investment business. And about the time that I left Standard of California, a friend of mine came tome, and he was involved in a little company, a private company, and theywere trying to raise more money and asked me if I’d be interested in investingin it. I looked at it and put in a little money. It was in 1959, and I didn’t haveall that much money, but I put some in and it worked out pretty well.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Money that you happened to have saved? Edwards: Yes. My father gave me some money. So that worked out well! And lookingback, that was my first private investment. Then I had a broker in SanFrancisco— I had called a friend of mine from Stanford and Harvard—Bill[William K.] Bowes. Have you talked to Bill? 20<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh yes. Edwards: Well, Bill’s a very bright guy, very bright, and well worth listening to, andhe’s a wonderful man. But I’d called him when I first came to San Franciscowith Standard of Cal and I’d said, “Do you know a good stock broker intown?” Interviewing Bill must have been really interesting because he doesn’ttalk a lot.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: He doesn’t. Edwards: I’d be curious to see that interview!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, it took some doing, but he’s also just a real charmer. Edwards: Oh he is. I want to tell you, he is a wonderful man; he is a wonderful person!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You just have to be patient. It comes out. Edwards: You have to be really patient with Bill! [laughter] But I called Bill and I said,“Bill, are there any good brokers in town? Can you advise me on a goodbroker?” Typical Bowes, he says, “John Bryan.” Two words. John worked forthe same company he was with. He was with Blyth and Bill was aninvestment banker. So I met John Bryan, in about ’57, I guess. So John and Iwould talk investments, and then he would advise me on investing and soforth. He was a good man, a wonderful man, as it turns out. He was mypartner for many years. A fine man. So he had made what would be a ventureinvestment, and I think he made it in about 1955 or something. It was acompany called Memorex which made magnetic tape and discs forinstrumentation and for computers.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Bill [William H.] Draper had a connection, did he not? Edwards: Memorex? I don’t think so. Bill came out in about ’59 or ’60, I think. He waswith Inland Steel and he came to the Bay Area. His father started a ventureoperation.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Draper, Gaither & Anderson.  Edwards: Draper, Gaither & Anderson. And that was financed by—a name that’smillion for that firm. They had a big operation and a beautiful building downnear Stanford.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I know we’re diverting, but that partnership is put forward by Bill and othersas the first real venture capital company. Edwards: On the West Coast. In the East there was General [Georges] Doriot atHarvard; he had a company called American Research and Development.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right. Edwards: There was the Whitney family and the Rockefeller family and Mrs. [JoanWhitney] Payson, in New York. Those were all very wealthy families that hadlots of money, and part of it was going into venture capital. And they weredoing it seriously; they were making an effort.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And were they calling it venture capital? Edwards: No, it wasn’t called venture capital, it was just private investment. I don’tremember when they started calling it venture capital, but it must have been inthe sixties sometime. Then they’d say, “What are you?” And I’d say, “I’m aventure capitalist.” And they’d say, “What’s that?” Nobody knew what it was.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Draper, Gaither & Anderson, as I remember, was founded around ’60 or ’61. Iwonder if it was labeled venture capital at that time. Edwards: No, I don’t think so. You’d have to ask Bill, but I don’t think it was. I think itwas just private capital. And we had some others—we had Ed [Edward H.]Heller, who worked for Schwabacher and Company here in San Francisco. Hewould do ventures. They said what you did if you wanted money from EdHeller—you would slide your proposal under his office door, and then he’dslide back five thousand dollars! [laughter] But he did get involved with somereally good things. In fact, one of them was Raychem, where he made a lot ofmoney.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And that brings in another connection. Way back I talked with Moshe Alafi. Edwards: Oh yes. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It seems to me that it was Heller that gave Moshe his first backing. Edwards: Could well have been—he would back anything a little bit.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Raychem was one of Alafi’s early companies as well. Edwards: He could have been an investor in it. It was Paul [M.] Cook’s company.There was a wonderful story about Ed Heller. He had a number ofgrandchildren, and he was trying to give them all money. And the youngestgrandchild he gave Raychem stock to, and Raychem stock was a rocket! It justtook off. So he had one wealthy grandchild and all these othergrandchildren— Which caused a problem, which is something I’ve thoughtabout a lot!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Maybe it’s better to portion out a bit. Edwards: But not to lock yourself in, and you try to deal with everybody on an equalbasis.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is that a good place to switch the [tapes]? I took the story away from you. Edwards: What story?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, you’re still at Lionel Edie, right? Edwards: Edie, E-D-I-E [spells], Lionel Edie.[End Audio File 1]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: This is tape number two. It’s still May 12, and I’m still talking with Mr.Edwards—and I’m still Sally <|endoftext|>
Interviewer! [chuckling]. So let’s pick up at LionelEdie. You were there quite some time; you were there almost nine years.  Edwards: I was there nine years, but all that time, as I say, the first venture deal I did,that I would consider was a venture deal, was in 1959 and that’s when I wentto work for Lionel Edie. That venture came along about three months after Iworked for Lionel Edie. I had some friends; Reid Dennis was working forFireman’s Fund, Bowes was working for Blyth; Bill [William H.] Draper wasworking for Draper, Gaither & Anderson, [Franklin] Pitch Johnson came outfrom Inland Steel. He’d been a fraternity brother of mine when I was incollege, and he was my best man when I got married.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh really! Edwards: Yes, and so he and Bill formed Draper & Johnson.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It’s incestuous. [chuckling] Edwards: Sixty-one, ’62.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So everybody’s connected to everybody. Edwards: This group—we were friends. Outside of venture capital we knew each other;we’d been at Stanford more or less the same time. Reid’s a little older than Iam; Bowes was in the war. As I say, I did the first investment in ’59 and 1960I did another one. I can’t remember what it was— It was Beckman andWhitley; it was a little company that nobody in his right mind would invest in. Beckman and Whitley was started by John Beckman, and it had three productsthat were basically John’s hobbies; things that he was interested in. One ofthose products was extremely fast photography. If you’ve seen pictures of abullet going through a window or going through an apple or something andyou can see little teeny segments—that was one of John’s cameras. It wasbased on a whirling turbine with mirrored blades, and every time a blade wentby, it recorded a picture. And the blades were going very fast. So that was onebusiness. The next one was explosively actuated devices, like you’d haveexploding bolts, when they separate a rocket from one stage to two stages of arocket, or in an oil refinery fire you could have an explosive actuated valve—avalve to close very quickly and remotely; you’d use a little explosive chargeto close the valve—that kind of thing. And the other product wasmeteorological devices; three businesses that had nothing to do with eachother at all! [chuckling] Anyway, so we went into that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And you did that because you respected him?  Edwards: No. I was working for Lionel Edie.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I know that. But why—I mean, there probably were many ways that you couldhave invested your money. Edwards: As I said, we didn’t know anything about venture capital, and Bowes had beeninvolved in investment banking. But there was nobody teaching us how to doventure capital, we just did it. Beckman and Whitley was a terrible idea. Itworked out all right because somebody bought it. A company called TechnicalOperations bought Beckman and Whitley because they wanted something thatBeckman and Whitley had. So we got out of it and made money with it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. Edwards: But starting a company based on a man’s three hobbies that are totallydifferent is a really bad idea, a really bad idea! [<|endoftext|>
Interviewer chuckles] Nobodywould do that, but we did it. So then in ’60 I did another investment or two,and then in ’61 I did another couple investments. In ’59 Congress had passedthe SBIC [Small Business Investment Company] Act—you know what that is.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. Edwards: And they were making it attractive for people to do venture investing, becausethere wasn’t much venture investing going on and they could see that it wasimportant. One of the few things that Congress did right. [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Reid Dennis talked about the SBIC, and not always positively, as it turned out,but I haven’t heard anybody talk about the federal side of it. What did promptthis and who was behind it in the Congress? Edwards: I don’t know who was behind it in Congress. It was part of the Small BusinessAdministration. The SBIC project was put in the Small BusinessAdministration operation. It was valuable in those days because there wasn’tmuch venture capital. There might have been a little venture capital in the EdHellers and people like that here, and then the Draper, Gaither & Andersons,but there wasn’t anything anyplace else—in Minneapolis or anywhere. So ithad a purpose. Now Reid spoke badly of it because it’s no longer needed here.It might be needed in Omaha or someplace that has no venture capital and hasnone of the milieu that we live in, so it can be useful. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I don’t want to put words in his mouth, but as I remember what he saidwas eventually it became so bureaucratic that— Edwards: Oh it’s awful.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That it wasn’t the way to go anymore. Edwards: See John and I—we were doing these things and we were using our own cashand that’s all we had. The SBIC program had some advantages. It gave youfour to one leverage; for every dollar you put in, the government would loanyou four dollars—loan—on good terms, ten year terms at a government-levelkind of interest rates. They were trying to encourage people to do venturecapital. And so that was a big positive. So John and I were makinginvestments of $10,000 or something in those days, and we were all workingtogether. We took what little money we had and would get together and do adeal, because together we’d have enough money to do something butindividually we didn’t.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now if the government is behind this, they must presumably have a widernational purpose. I don’t remember what was going on in the late fifties, butwas there worry about the United States maybe losing out in terms ofinnovation and international competitiveness? Edwards: I doubt it. We had done very well economically as a nation for a long time.And in 1959, we were by ourselves in the world. Nobody had anything exceptus. We had to rebuild Europe and rebuild Japan and that whole process wasgoing forward. We weren’t frightened of anything. And I don’t think anybodyin government really knew what they were doing, because I don’t think theyever know, really, what they’re doing. [<|endoftext|>
Interviewer chuckles]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Are you a libertarian? Edwards: I’m not a libertarian, but I’m close! I’m close. It’s just awful what governmentdoes—just awful. Who was this kid that was in “Home Alone”? [LindaNorton, the videographer, says Macauley Culkin] Macauley, yes. I saw a greatpicture. It was Macauley, and he had a surprised look on his face. Aneconomist was talking about what’s going to happen to the next generation.So Macauley’s there thinking oh my God! What are they doing! I’m going tohave to pay for all that! And that’s what’s happening now. It’s crazy. Butanyway—what were you talking about? <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, we were talking about the genesis of the SBIC and it sounds as though itwasn’t founded because— Edwards: No, it was a good idea. It was a good idea.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: —of any economic downturn in the United States. Those were still the postwar boom years. Edwards: Yes. I think someone in Congress realized that it would be good if we hadmore small companies starting, and so forth. And I don’t think he had any ideawhat was going to happen. And I think that whole program now, with theexception of maybe some little areas in the nation where they don’t haveaccess to venture capital—it’s not needed. Here in Silicon Valley it hasn’tbeen needed for—how long—thirty years? There’s money here; lots ofmoney.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because there are people like you. Edwards: Yes. Well, I had an SBIC, of course, in those early days. But then in theeighties I got so tired of all the bureaucratic nonsense that I had to go throughwith this SBIC and all the stupid stuff that I just disbanded it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Are we then up to Bryan and Edwards? Edwards: No, it hadn’t started. John is still working at Blyth, and I’m still working atLionel Edie, and we’re doing ventures—evenings, weekends, any old time.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But you have an SBIC. Edwards: He had an SBIC and I had an SBIC and they were identical. John has fourchildren and I have four children. We’re sharing our SBICs with our childrenand our wives.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What does that mean? Edwards: Oh it was a corporation, and they all owned stock. They all owned stock in it,so as I prospered, they prospered. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And is that the way SBICs worked generally? That the family were investorsor stockholders? Edwards: No, no. Most SBICs were set up as little corporations, and they went out andraised the money and then they got four-to-one leverage.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, that’s what I thought. How did you do— Edwards: I just did a private one. Family-owned. All mine.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And the government was perfectly happy with that. Edwards: Sure. Well, why wouldn’t they be? One, I was a terrific citizen. I did all thethings they wanted me to do. I followed all the nonsense they wanted me todo. I paid them back their money. They couldn’t have been happier, I wouldthink!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What did they look at? Edwards: Every investment, twice a year.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And in the past, too? Those bureaucrats running the SBIC must have looked atyour track record. Edwards: I don’t know what they did. Every year we had SBIC guys coming throughwith the audit, and so forth. They were not bright bulbs. [<|endoftext|>
Interviewer chuckles]They were not. They were very bureaucratic lower-level-type governmentpeople, and it was just ridiculous.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What were they doing? Looking at your books? Edwards: Yes, they’d go through all the books, every investment, all the papers, and soforth. They were all there.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So how long did that last? Edwards: How long did I have an SBIC? <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. And where did it get you? Edwards: Well, it got me a lot of money! [laughter] I made a lot of money.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Which was the whole idea, wasn’t it! Edwards: But in, I guess, the mid-eighties—I don’t know when it was. I finally just gottired of it and I paid them back all their money. When we first did our SBICs,the only form of SBIC they did was corporation, and so here I had acorporation which I owned part of and my children owned part of. Theyowned half and I owned half. And after my wife passed away in ’78, I didn’twant my kids wound up in a corporation. If the corporation existed, and one ofthem ended up as president or chairman or whatever and the others weren’t,there’d just be a battle. There’d be a squabble because somebody was gettinga better deal than somebody else, and somebody wanted money and somebodyelse didn’t want money, and they’d be pulling and tugging. And so as soon as they made it possible to have an SBIC that was apartnership, I ended my corporation and started a partnership. That was a veryexpensive move because it was a taxable event, and I still owned the samethings I’d owned before but I’d paid a huge amount of taxes on making thatmove. But then my children were not attached to each other. They’re everyone of them totally independent. There’s nothing they have to agree on unlessthey want to agree, because I don’t want to leave a family that’s battling. Lotsof families end up just battling each other, hating each other, suing each other,wasting the family’s assets squabbling over something. I didn’t want that, so Ihave it set up so that when I die what I have goes to each of them, and they’renot bound together. If they want to do whatever they want to do they can do it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Very clever. Edwards: That’s what I did.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now all this is happening and you’re still with an investor counselor. Youhaven’t yet started— Edwards: Bryan and Edwards.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: There’s something before Bryan and Edwards, isn’t there?  Edwards: What?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: There’s Ritter Partners and Banner Partners. Edwards: I’ve got two family partnerships. I guess Ritter Partners grew out of my SBIC,so when I ended the SBIC and that whole thing was ended it went into RitterPartners. And there the kids owned half and I owned half, and it was calledRitter Partners.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why Ritter? Edwards: I spent a lot of time as a child at a place called June Lake, which is on the eastside of the Sierras, just east of here.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I know it. Edwards: I spent a lot of time there; my parents had a cabin up there, so I was there alot. There’s some wonderful backcountry there. You can go up out of thevalley to June Lake, and then you get up into a bunch of lakes and Banner andRitter Peaks—they’re very tall peaks in the Sierras. And so I’ve named a lotof stuff that the family did after Carson and Banner and Ritter and a wholebunch of places there and mountains there. Banner Peak and Ritter Peak;they’re both tall granite peaks.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I know that country. I’m a backpacker. Edwards: It’s beautiful. Oh you do. Well, I’ve been back in that country a lot, a lot.Carson, Minaret—I’ve named a lot of things after those peaks back there.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Would you call those limited partnerships? What would those entities that youcreated be called? Edwards: They’re just family partnerships; they’re not limited partnerships. There areno limited partners. There are only partners there, and I’m the managingpartner.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. And those still exist? 30 Edwards: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All right. Then is the next step Bryan and Edwards? Edwards: Yes. In 19—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Sixty-eight according to this note. Edwards: Yes, ’68, John and I had been doing ventures and we were spending more andmore time on ventures. We’d gone up to look at a company in Santa Rosacalled Optical Coating Laboratories, which is a little company up there in thislittle town, and it was isolated and they did some interesting stuff. And talkingto these guys, there wasn’t much in that town except Optical CoatingLaboratories [chuckling] that was interesting, and so they spent a lot of timetogether. They planned and worked on their own operation a lot, spent a lot oftime thinking about it. And as we drove home, it occurred to us that thatwould be really— I mean, why are we doing what we’re dong? We should bespending full time on venture capital. And it had a lot of advantages, so westarted Bryan and Edwards.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And what were the advantages? Edwards: Well, we were Bryan and Edwards, and we faced the world as Bryan andEdwards. It was a sort of an institutional-sounding thing with legs, longevity,you know. But Bryan and Edwards was really John and myself. And when aventure would come in we’d just cut it in two; John would take half and I’dtake half, and he’d take his half and he’d put it where he wanted to with hischildren and so forth, and my half I’d do the same. It’d go in thesepartnerships. And so the world looked at us as this bigger thing. It doubled thesize of our investing ability. So instead of investing x-thousand, we couldinvest 2x thousand. So that was the advantage. Another advantage was John’s a very bright, decent, fair, honest human being,and if I wanted to go on a trip or something I could leave and he’d bethoroughly familiar with everything I was doing. If I died he could take overmy estate and take care of it. And the same with John—if he wanted to travel,or died for any reason, I was there to help his wife and family with theirproblems because I was thoroughly familiar with them and he was thoroughlyfamiliar with them. And that was a big advantage. And so we formed thiscompany. It was really just a partnership but it faced the world as a seriousentity. And that’s why. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you unique in having that form of organization? Edwards: Yes, I think so. It just happened to be two people that were doing the samething.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But everybody else that we’ve mentioned, they end up in limited partnerships,do they not? Edwards: Yes. They do. The limited partners have no liability and they’re not liable foranything. They can’t get any more money out of a limited partner than he’salready put in, and if anybody gets sued, it’s not going to be the limitedpartner because he wasn’t involved in whatever happened that was not good.And so it’s a good form for venture capital because all these people that put inlots of money. Nowadays it’s mostly pension funds and institutions putting inthe really big money. They’re clean and so they’re the limited partners. Thegeneral partners are the ones that run the company, take the responsibility, andso forth, and also put in some money and get 20 percent, 30 percent of theprofit that comes out of it. And it works well for both sides.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So in essence, my simplistic way of looking at it, you and John Bryan wereacting as general partners; you just didn’t have a limited partnership. Edwards: Right. We were general partners. There was no limited group behind us. Andwe thought about that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: The obvious question is, what about the liability? You have the advantage ofmaking your own decisions and going away on vacation when you want to,but you also have the weight if anything goes wrong there’s nowhere else togo but you. Edwards: Yes, it’s our fault but it’s our money. [chuckling] So who’s to complain? Ourchildren?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So none of that deterred you. Edwards: No, no. We didn’t ever do anything that was illegal or—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh no, I’m not meaning that, but venture capital can go bad! Not everycompany is going to be a success.  Edwards: Oh yes, tell me about it!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] Well, I want to hear about the non-successes. Edwards: Venture capital is a risky business, and the majority of your investments willfail. They’ll either totally go bust or they’ll be big disappointments and they’llnever amount to much of anything. They’ll just be a nuisance and take upyour time and effort, and so forth. The winners, or the ones that don’t takemuch time, they’ve got very good managements and that’s why they’rewinners.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, well how did you deal psychologically with that? Edwards: With what?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, the idea that John and I are going to put money into x. Edwards: Well, we didn’t have to do it together. If John wanted to do something and Ididn’t want to do it, he did it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Okay, well, you alone. What goes on in your mind when you’re thinking thatthis could be a booming success and it could be a booming failure. Edwards: That’s always in your mind. It’s risky, risky, very risky.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Does that worry you? Edwards: No! Well, the mathematics of venture capital is this. All you can lose is whatyou put into it. Right?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [tentatively] Yes. Edwards: So that’s it. One time. 1x is what you put into it. If it’s successful, it can go1000x! One 1000x will offset a thousand bad ones.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Okay, so that’s what you’re thinking.  Edwards: Oh yes. It’s exactly like drilling oil wells. One out of twenty wildcats willproduce oil and produce a lot of oil. And nineteen of them will producenothing. The only way you can find oil is to drill down and find out if it’sthere. You might have reasons for thinking it might be there. But a lot of thetime when you drill a wildcat oil well, you get nothing, zip, total loss; thesame with venture capital. You’ve got to have enough money to do multipleventures, and use some sense in doing them, and it works out beautifully. Idon’t even think about the losses. So what’s another loss?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But it does seem to me that this is a direct correlation with where you’ve comefrom. Edwards: Yes, it might be.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Might? [chuckling] Edwards: [chuckling] That’s it! That’s it. Yes, sure. [Venture capital] is the same as theoil business.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because a lot of people would just not be able to do that. Edwards: Well, I’ve done hundreds of ventures, and the majority of them eitherbottomed out totally or didn’t amount to anything. Very few of them, 20percent of them or so, were very comfortably successful, and some of themwere outstandingly successful.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And that’s all you need. That’s what you’re saying. Edwards: Oh that’s more than enough, more than enough. But you’ve got to realize thatyou’re going to make a lot of mistakes, and you’re going to fail most of thetime.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: When you began this side investing—you had a job-job, which presumablywas paying you decently—but were you thinking of your family and saying toyourself, I can only put so much into venture investment because I’m notgoing to risk the—what’s the term? Edwards: The corpus, risk the assets, risk the fortune. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. Edwards: It’s always in the back of your mind, but I didn’t ever take those huge riskseither. I didn’t ever take all of my chips and put them in on one bet. I alwayshad some left over. The guy that did it was Reid.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did he? Edwards: Yes. He did it twice. He was an electrical engineer, and he was working as ananalyst with Fireman’s Fund. He went down to Ampex, which was an earlycompany on Silicon Valley. In fact, they developed videotape recorders, andhe was able to talk to the guys on the benches: what are you doing, and whatall this means, and so forth. He was able to understand what they were talkingabout. And he sort of mortgaged his house and got his mother to mortgage herhouse, and he put all this money in.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] Oh he didn’t tell me that! Edwards: And I think he made $1 million out of it or something like that! It was huge!Then he was talking to an engineer out of Varian—was it Varian? Varian wasdoing something called ionic vacuum pumps, very obscure, you don’t want toknow—ionic vacuum. But it was a vacuum pump that could pump a vacuumdown as close to outer space as you can get. You get almost every last particleout of this void, and they did it by having a current flowing from a cathode toan anode and then plastering the stuff in there against the wall. And it wasbeing used at places like SLAC—the Stanford Linear Accelerator [Center].They’d pump that tube down with as little substance, as little—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Almost a vacuum. Edwards: --[not?] anything in there. They’d do it with ionic vacuum pumps, so it’s usedfor things like that. If you want to get close to outer space, you use the ionic—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I wonder if it was around when Ernest Lawrence was building his cyclotron? Edwards: Well, the cyclotron had to be totally a vacuum.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I had never thought about how they did that.  Edwards: And you could pump it down, way down, with mechanical pumps, but it’snever really as clean as you can get it with an ionic vacuum.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: When you’re trying to study atomic particles, you are going to have bigproblems. Edwards: Yes, that’s what they were doing. If there’s anything in the way, that foulsthings up.So Reid started this company with the money he had out of Ampex, and itdidn’t go very well! [chuckling] It was not earning a lot of money; it wasgrowing pretty rapidly, but let’s say it was growing 30 percent a year, and itwas earning 3 percent on its assets, so it’s in trouble. You’ve got to bringmore money in from the outside. So John and I went in to give him a handthere, and we helped to finance it, and then he, fortunately, sold it toPerkinElmer before it went broke. [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: As I remember, he had first cut his teeth—and you correct me because youknow the story better than I—by investing for Fireman’s Fund. So presumablyhe’d learned the ropes. Edwards: Yes, he did some investing for Fireman’s Fund. He invested in a—what thehell’s the name of that company. It was a company that could read numbersand letters and things—electronically, down in Dallas.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, Bill Draper talked about that too. I can’t remember the name of thatcompany. [Recognition Equipment].Mr. Dennis also had a fairly tolerant boss at Fireman’s Fund, who when hesaw that Reid was making money for the company, let him go do his thing.All I’m trying to clarify is Reid just didn’t all of a sudden start out of the blueinvesting his own personal fortune without some background in investing. Edwards: Yes he was—right. Well, he had more background than we had! So Reidpushed it all in twice; I don’t think he’d ever do that again. He took all of hischips and put it in Ampex, and then all of his chips and put them into Ultech.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now I’m presuming that you didn’t, as you put it, help him out solely becausehe was a friend. Edwards: No. We hoped to make money out of it. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And so you saw that this deal had potential. Edwards: Yes, it looked like it had potential.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, and it did. Edwards: Yes, well, I hope PerkinElmer made money out of it. [laughter] It’s a verylegitimate science. It’s wonderful and necessary.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, where are we now? Edwards: I guess we’ve started Bryan and Edwards.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Bryan Edwards, yes. Edwards: In ’68. In those early days, other people had all the money from these limitedpartnerships, most of the other people. I think Art Rock had substantialbacking, although he didn’t have a normal limited partnership.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What about Pitch? Edwards: Pitch went out and raised money, and he started a company called AssetManagement Company. He raised a limited partnership, several of them. Johnand I didn’t do that. So we couldn’t replenish our funds. So when we startedout early on, we were making investments, each of us, sort of in the $10,000,$20,000 level each. And so they were $20,000 to $40,000 together.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now is that a very small investment for the period? Edwards: Very small. In those days there were much smaller investments. In the earlydays you could build a semiconductor fabricating facility, the whole thing,you could make semiconductors with all the equipment, and so forth, start acompany, for a couple of million dollars in the early days, the very early days.Now, just to build a fabrication plant might cost a couple of billion dollars. Soin those days it was cheaper to do ventures; they were not as big andambitious as they do now.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And so the amounts that you tended to invest were par for the period?  Edwards: We just grew, so we grew from—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But you weren’t under-investing compared to your peers? Edwards: Oh no, no. We didn’t have the money that the limited partnerships [had]—nowhere close. And gradually, we were sort of out of the mainstream. In thesixties we were in the mainstream; in the early seventies we were sort of beingphased out because more of them were coming in with limited partnershipsthey were forming. And so we became less significant. We had a lot of friendsin the business, and so we had a lot of contacts, and so forth, which wereuseful, but we didn’t have the money to compete with that group.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So what did you do about that? Edwards: Well, we kept getting more and more money. So by ’83 or something, weweren’t making $10,000 or $20,000 investments; we were making $200,000to $600,000 investments just by making the money and paying our taxes andhaving more money to invest.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But also establishing a strong track record so that you could go out and buy— Edwards: We didn’t ever do it. We thought about it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So where was the money coming from? Edwards: Just from us.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Generated by your investment. Edwards: Just selling successful investments.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh I see. Edwards: And they had grown over the years.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you never had to deal with outsiders.  Edwards: Never dealt with outsiders. And I’m sure we’d be a good deal richer today ifwe had had more backing, but we didn’t. But, and I know, we’re comfortable.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You’re rich enough. [chuckling] Edwards: In fact, we’re quite comfortable.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You wanted to have independence and flexibility. I’m imagining that that’svery difficult to have if you’re obligated to all these limited partners. Edwards: Well, if you’re going to go that way, you need to build an organization, andyou need to shoulder all the people problems you’ll have building anorganization. You’ve got to pay attention because your name is on the door,and people are putting large amounts of money into your care, and so forth,and that’s a heavy responsibility, and you should be thinking about it. So wewent one way, everybody else went some other way, but we’ve doneextremely well.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you ever have second thoughts? Edwards: No. No. We thought it over; we thought it over. And at one point in the, Idon’t know, in the late seventies or early eighties, we considered—I think itmust have been in the late seventies—we considered trying to put together aventure fund that would be foreign-owned, so that the majority of theownership would be people that were not citizens of the United States. Youcould take a foreign-owned company and put it in a tax haven, and then it’s aforeign-domiciled, foreign-owned company, and the United States really hasnothing to do with it. And up until 1986, that form existed. Then the UnitedStates said you can’t do that anymore; you’ve got to declare that income.Before that, you could just let it compound. We were in an investment in theNetherlands Antilles. It was run out of New York; it was an investment group,run out of New York, majority foreign-owned. They were incorporated in theNetherlands Antilles and they paid 2 percent a year taxes, or something, alittle bit in the Netherlands Antilles, but the U.S. government had no controlover a foreign-owned company, foreign-domiciled. So that was that. That’sthe way you ran it. We considered it and decided not to do it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why?  Edwards: Didn’t want the trouble and then didn’t necessarily— We were notcomfortable with the people that might invest in it, and the kind of problems itmight bring us, and so we wouldn’t have friends investing, and so forth.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It seems to me, compared to everything else you’ve done, a little devious. Edwards: What?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That it’s a way of making money without paying taxes to the United Statesgovernment. Edwards: It’s not devious because it was legal.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I know. Edwards: It was absolutely legal, and then in 1986 the government made it not legal andthen it wasn’t legal.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But look at all the investigations that are going on right now; the people whohave Swiss bank accounts and holdings in the Caribbean. Edwards: This would have been done right out in the open, absolutely open, absolutelyopen and totally within the law.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh I’m not implying that you would ever do anything illegal. Edwards: No, it wasn’t illegal, [chuckling] but we considered it and didn’t do it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why did the U.S. government decided to stop that? Edwards: It wasn’t for SBICs or venture companies—it was for all kind of companies.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh I know that. Edwards: Any foreign-domiciled, foreign-controlled corporation was not subject toUnited States law. Period. But U.S. citizens are subject to United States law, 40so in ’86 they said any U.S. citizen involved in one of these things has toreport that income as if it were coming to them. And that was the end of it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I’ll bet it was. Edwards: But it was 100 percent legal. We never would have done anything that wasillegal.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I don’t want you to think that I was ever implying that you would considerdoing anything illegal, because that wasn’t in my mind. But I am thinkingabout it in the context of what’s going on in the news today. Edwards: Well, I think people that take money, spirit it out of the country, put it in aSwiss bank account and let it accumulate tax free, are terrible. They arebreaking the law every inch of the way and they should be apprehended. Ithink they will open these Swiss banks and find out what’s going on, andanybody that’s been doing that is going to be in a severe problem, and I hopethey get them.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, it’s almost noon. Should we stop for today? Edwards: As you wish.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And then pick up again? Because I do want to talk to you about where to gonext. So maybe we’ll just stop taping here?Norton: I have a question. Edwards: Fire!Norton: I can’t resist asking, what did you think of the movie, There Will Be Blood?Did you see it? Edwards: I did. He was a very bad man! And you’re going to find bad men, bad peopleeverywhere. But that man was sick. I did see the movie and I thought it was avery powerful movie. Who was the guy that played the—Norton: Daniel Day Lewis.  Edwards: Daniel Day Lewis was brilliant, absolutely brilliant.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: For someone who didn’t see it—who was he playing? Edwards: He didn’t play anybody in particular; he played a wildcatter, a guy that wasout in the mining business trying to make money out of a mine. He got intothe oil business and he was a very devious, very dishonest person, and mean.He had no friends; he had no people skills. He was avaricious and that was all,and he ended up making a lot of money in the oil business. He did it bytrickery and dishonesty, and so forth.Norton: Yes, you’ve mentioned your interest in religion, and that kind of Americanreligion was also a factor in that movie. Edwards: Well, yes. I am a religious person but not in any religion that exists on earth.We don’t know who God is or what God is. In fact, I wrote a little book abouttwo years ago called The Evolution of Religion.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh did you! Edwards: I’ll give you a copy if you’d like it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I’d like it. Edwards: It’s not going to get any awards, but it’s my thinking on that very subject.Norton: Well, thank you for letting me ask that question. Edwards: You can ask any questions you’d like to, Linda.Norton: I’ll turn this off now.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It is June 2, 2009 and this is the second interview with Mr. Edwards. We arein his home, his very attractive home, in Atherton. Last time, we got up to Bryan and Edwards. I thought what we could discuss today is the basics ofhow you go about venture capital. Maybe the best way to talk about it is tohave you go through what kind of questions you ask when somebody comesto you with a business plan or a proposal, then what? What do you do? Edwards: Well, the two most important things you look for are a competentmanagement team. Really, you’d like to have more than just a guy with theidea, although frequently you’ll back somebody with just his idea. Buteventually you want to see a team; you want to see the marketing and thefinance and the research and development, and all that, in one place. So that’sthe beginning. The people are the most important thing. And then the nextmost important thing is that the people are trying to do something that’ssignificant. If they’re going into an area where there’s terrific competition orwhere your competition is very difficult, it’s less attractive than if they’regoing into an area where they’re creating a new market or building a newindustry where there isn’t that much competition and they get there early.Those are the most important factors in selecting an investment.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But if they’re going into a new area, I would think that would also meanunknown risks. Edwards: Absolutely—but unknown potential.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] The glass is always half full. Edwards: Amgen was started by Bill Bowes, who is a venture capitalist. He had the ideaearly in the biotech era of bringing together some very, very capable peopleand the very best technicians in the country. He inquired around about whoare these people. He was turned down by somebody at Berkeley, I think. Andhe asked that person,“Who else should I go see?” And they mentioned someprofessors at Caltech. He went down and interested them, and he broughttogether a group of advisors, and he put together a company, and he createdAmgen, which was a multi-billion dollar company in a huge new industry andit was really, I think, the largest and most successful company in that area,still going—in a competitive area but I think they’ll be fine.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you have any connection with Amgen? Edwards: Well, I was an investor at the beginning. Bill is a friend of mine and so I hadthe opportunity to put money into Amgen, and it worked out extremely well.It went hundreds of times. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was it Bowes that sold you on the idea? Edwards: Well, Bill Bowes is a very dear old friend of mine, and he’s extremely brightand has great judgment. It wasn’t hard to sell me.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You didn’t feel that you had to go out and do some investigating on yourown? Edwards: Well, I was interested in what he had done and who he had chosen and whatthey planned to do. Their original plan had to do more with veterinary sorts ofthings, at least that was part of their original plan, because they’re not sodifficult to get approved by the FDA. But they went off, and they went intodifferent ways; ways that they didn’t anticipate getting done.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, that was certainly a good example of a revolutionary technology. Edwards: Right, and it was off in a market by itself and it did extremely well, is doingextremely well. And there are always problems, but it’s fine.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, to my comment about risk, you immediately said yes, but potential. Edwards: Yes, well, they go together. Terrific risk and the potential.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How do you handle the risk part of it? I mean as a person. Edwards: Well, the majority of venture investments that I’ve made, and I’ve made a lotof them, have not worked out the way that the original plan was. They havenot been as successful. Sometimes they’ve been a total bomb and wentbankrupt; you got nothing back. Sometimes they struggled along, and theybecame part of the walking dead, and they went on for years and years butdidn’t die. And most of the investments that I’ve made have done one of thosetwo things. Some of them, though, have been big winners, and they have beensubstantial winners, and those are the ones that make it worthwhile.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What do you do about the walking dead? Is there any way that you can killthem off? [chuckling] Edwards: You sell your interest in it or you wait until they die or someone buys them.More likely, someone’s going to buy them eventually and you can get your money back and make some money on them, but it won’t be significant. It’snot enough money to make up for the losers.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, in your mention of the importance of the team—that seems to me tolead into a question about people skills and how you assess people. Is that abig part of venture capital? Edwards: Absolutely. And that’s a difficult, imprecise art, but you just have to developjudgment, and then people leave a wake in their lives. They don’t go throughlife unseen and unheard, so you can check on them a bit. But I’ve invested insome people that were—they were mental problems. They were really odd![chuckling] I could mention a few of them, but you know—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you know that from the start? Edwards: Oh no. I was totally surprised. We had a person in who was a crook! How doyou protect yourself? You really can’t. He wasn’t a known crook until he wasknown to us, but after he failed, and we dismissed him from this company, hewent back to Carnegie-Mellon on the East Coast and started again. He left hisreputation in Oregon, and nobody checked back on him with us to find outwhat sort of a person he was, but basically he was dishonest.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That is a lesson in the important of due diligence, is it not? Edwards: Oh yes. But how do you check on somebody who’s never been apprehendedand doing something criminal?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, that’s a problem. But it seems to me the people who followed you letthe ball drop in not talking to you. Edwards: They could have talked to us. All they had to do is ask him where he’d beenthe last ten years or five years, and if he’d told them they could come backand see us. But he probably laid down a good enough smokescreen so theydidn’t do it.I once invested in a pair of PhDs; very, very well trained but they were sosecretive about what they were doing that they wouldn’t talk to customers![chuckling] They wouldn’t explain to the customers all the technology thatthey had because they didn’t want to— I’ve run into people like that that werenutty about whatever they were doing and how important they thought it was.So you find strange people, but you can’t measure those people, really, beforeyou invest. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because you’ve been an investor, and you presumably are sitting on theirboard, right? You would think that you would add quite a bit of clout. Edwards: That’s later. [chuckling] By the time you’re on the board, you have made theinvestment. And then you struggle with these people that are a little odd. Sothat’s part of the risk.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So part of the oddness is then, not listening or at least following through onthe advice that you’re giving? Edwards: Well, I wouldn’t say that my advice is always that good. But if it’s a businessthey’ve started, then they understand. I’m dependent on their advice in manycases more than they’re dependent on mine. But if they go way offline andhead off in the wrong direction, I might be able to say, “You mustn’t do that.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You presumably come into this enterprise with a general knowledge abouthow businesses should develop. Edwards: Yes, right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And they presumably don’t have that same kind of expertise. Edwards: Right, most often. Most often, or many times. I won’t say most often, butmany times they don’t have that experience. But—they have healthy egos andthey’re bright as hell and they— I see somebody approaching my front door.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you need to do something? Edwards: I’m going to have to. My housekeeper’s not in. [brief interruption inrecording] Back to work.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Can you say something about the dynamics of being on a board of directors?Or is that way too general a question? Edwards: Well, I could talk about it. [chuckling] Boards vary all over the place.Sometimes you have somebody on the board that has a very difficultpersonality and you have to deal with them or get rid of them. And sometimesyou have boards where there’s a certain bias along one way or another. Youhave to work with them, but it’s very difficult to generalize about that. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I bet. Edwards: That’s just all the dynamics of a group of people together that are not usuallytogether, and you have to work your way through it with some people skills.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you find, in general, that people listen to your advice? Edwards: Sometimes. But generally, you know, you’re working together. It isn’t as ifyou’re working opposed to each other, and the advice is flowing all the time.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. So it’s more collaboration. Edwards: Yes, it’s collaboration. I wouldn’t know how to run one of these businesses,really. I’m not a technician in that sense. I could do it briefly, but I wouldn’tbe successful at it long-term.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I’m presuming that you’re not an expert in the technology—assumingthat it’s is a technology-based company we’re talking about. Edwards: That’s true, that’s true. I have a background in technology, and I have thevocabulary—most of it anyway—and I can learn what I don’t have, but I’mnot an expert.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, so that doesn’t pose a barrier. You’re not going to say, “Well, I’m notgoing to invest in biotechnology because I don’t really have a basis in it.” Edwards: Yes, but you could. You know, I was there at the beginning. There wasnobody there to teach anybody how to be a venture capitalist. We were not atspecialized. We did everything. Anything that came along that lookedinteresting we would do, whether it was in publishing or finance ortechnology or whatever. We invested in farming and all kind of things. Andnowadays there’s more expertise, frequently, in a venture group. They’llspecialize in medical things, or they’ll specialize in communication or insoftware or something. They’ll have a lot more expertise in the venture capitalgroup. But we did everything; if it looked interesting and looked like it couldsucceed, we did it. And if I were starting out again, I would make fewermistakes. [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, we can all say that!  Edwards: But in the early days there were a handful of venture capital organizations inthe nation, and most of them were on the East Coast. There was nobody thathad been in this business for very long out here, and so we just did it andlearned by doing—and making a lot of mistakes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, but a lot of big hits too. Edwards: Yes. Well, that’s the wonderful thing about it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How do you feel about the current tendency toward specialization? Edwards: It makes a lot of sense.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Does it? Edwards: Oh sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So venture capitalist does really have a pretty good take on what thetechnology is. Edwards: Absolutely, right. Yes, it does make a lot of sense, and they’re better at ittoday. One, they have someone to teach them, and two, they’ve got the depthand the technology that they need. So it’s settled out the way it tis. It’s beenrationalized, much rationalized from where it was when we started.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Getting back to the subject of boards. I can remember when I was talking withGib Myers— Edwards: By the way, Gib lives right over there. [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That’s why it’s so familiar. We felt we’d been here before. Edwards: You’d been on the street before.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, anyway, Gib Myers, in an off-the-cuff remark said something to theeffect when Bill Edwards, way back, was sitting on multiple boards, peoplesaid to each other, “How can he do all that?”  Edwards: Well, you do the best you can! That’s how you do it, that’s how you do it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But my impression was that he meant that it wasn’t common in those days. Edwards: Oh no, it was common. Everybody did it.You had to do your part, and nobodycould sit on all of the boards in which they had an interest, and so somebodyis sitting on them representing you. So sometimes they depended on me tolook after things.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And is it usually the major investor that is the board member? Edwards: Yes, frequently. But in the early days we didn’t have many major investors.[chuckling] We needed each other just to be able to put together aninvestment. That first investment in Acurex—it was called Aerothermoriginally—was about $100,000. Well, it took several of us to do $100,000.Very few venture capitalists want to risk everything on one investment. ReidDennis did it twice. And he’ll never do it again, I don’t think.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That implies that you had quite a network. You hear about a business proposalthat you think is worth looking at, and then you pick up the phone and callPitch? Edwards: In those days it was very collegial. It isn’t anymore because the funds haveenough money now, frequently, they can do it straight up. They can do it allby themselves, and they do.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But what about the risk of that approach? Edwards: Well, let’s say you’ve got a fund with $500 million or a billion dollars in it,and you’re making an investment for a few tens of millions. That’s not thatbig an investment. You could lose it and it doesn’t hurt you much. It’s amatter of balance.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Does that mean that there’s now a lot of secrecy? Edwards: There’s a great deal more secrecy, a great deal more privacy now than therewas. Initially, why we would get together occasionally—the WesternAssociation of Venture Capitalists, or WASBIC, the Western Association ofSmall Business Investment Companies, which was its original name beforethere were many of these partnerships. And then in the late sixties, the partnerships started coming along, and we changed it to Western Associationof Venture Capitalists because it was no longer all SBICs.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But in the original group, all those members were people that today we wouldcall venture capitalists? Edwards: Yes. They all had SBICs; they started as Small Business InvestmentCompanies. Yes, but they weren’t called venture capitalists. In those days theywere called private capitalists.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Or what is it that Pitch was talking about—special situations. Edwards: [chuckling] Yes. Everything was a special situation.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Special, which could mean anything if you bandied that term around. Edwards: That’s right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You know we were talking off tape about the New York Times article I gave Talk to me about how youwould use a business plan and where it would get you. Edwards: They are useful because if somebody comes in with a business plan that’sabsolutely kooky, well, you don’t spend much time on it. It’s a reflection ofthe way they think, and you’re just not interested. So the business plan has tomake some sense; it can’t be crazy or it reflects on its originator. So they areuseful in that respect. But the world is changing rapidly all the time, and youhave to adjust to the change that takes place, and if you’ve made an error inyour original plan, you’ve got to be able to change it and go a differentdirection. But business plans never have been any more valuable than that;they don’t do what they say they’re going to do, frequently.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Does that mean that one of the things that you might be trying to assess whenyou’re sizing up an entrepreneur is how flexible he or she might be? Edwards: Sure, yes. Brent Bowers, “Investors Pay Business Plans Little Heed, Study Finds,” NYT, May 14, 2009. 50<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is he rigidly going to stick to this business plan? Edwards: That would certainly be a demerit, if the guy doesn’t have flexibility.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What other qualities spring to mind in an entrepreneur—things that you wouldsay, “Okay, this guy sounds interesting to me.” Edwards: Well, I think, to the degree that you can have it measured—brain power! Justintellectual firepower is really important. If you can find that, that’s certainlyan important thing. Also, to have someone that’s done it before, somebodythat’s been around once, either in the same business or some similarbusiness—he’s done it once—that is a big plus, because he’s made all thosemistakes and he won’t make them again.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And hopefully learned by them. Edwards: Yes, and hopefully won’t make them again.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So would you be a little distrustful of a graduate student coming to you withan idea from Stanford or Berkeley or wherever who had never been out in thebusiness world? Edwards: You’d have reservations about his ability to execute, and very frequently, theentrepreneur is incapable of taking the company into greater sizes. You haveto shunt him aside, deal with him, work with him, and he’ll frequently realizethat he’s over his head. So you can counsel, but just because you’re comingout of school, why an awful lot of great investments have started withsomeone coming out of Stanford—Google and others, fresh out of school.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, exactly. Edwards: So you don’t want to turn them away. You look at their idea.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But you try to lead them down a path that will make for a good company. Edwards: Yes, and as they put together a management team, you try to guide them intogood people that do the various functions. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, maybe it’s a cliché that venture capitalists are not only looking forgetting a sizable return on their investment, but building a company is animportant part of it. Edwards: Oh absolutely! And if you want to have a big success, you’ve built acompany, a big company.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And does this newer generation of venture capitalists also feel that way? Edwards: I’m so far out of touch with the newer generation of venture capitalists. I’msure they do; you just have to.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Aside from the specialization that you talked about as happening since you,the founders, came onto the scene, are there other big changes in the wayventure capital is done nowadays compared to how you founding fathers didit? Edwards: Well, that article I gave you suggests some major changes have taken place.Options have always been an important thing in the venture capital arena,because frequently you don’t have the money to pay people big salaries, andthe thing that attracts the very best people is to own part of [the company], andif you give them options, they can own part of it and it doesn’t cost you anycash at the moment. [technical interruption] So things like that, the very things—the FinancialAccounting Standards Board [FASB] getting stricter and stricter and stricterand reducing the kind of flexibility that you have in accounting. All sorts ofthings of that sort happened—taxes and one thing and another, and you’ve gotto adjust to it, but those adjustments probably can’t be made. They’re makingit too hard, the federal government is, because they’re not bright enough toknow what they’re doing. They’re dealing with a delicate thing out here inSilicon Valley, and they’re doing it in extremely clumsy fashion.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What is their objective? What are they trying to accomplish? Edwards: Just what they always try to do; they want to govern, they want to control,they want to get reelected, mostly. That’s the thing that drives the politicians. Michael S. Malone, “Washington Is Killing Silicon Valley,” Wall Street Journal, December 22, 2008, p. A19. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is this an offshoot of the recession and the idea that financial markets, ingeneral, need to be more heavily regulated? Edwards: That would be part of it. The more they regulate the venture business, themore difficult it gets to be, and basically, they’re killing the goose that lays thegolden egg. It’s never done any damage. The Microsofts, and the Ciscos, andthe Amgens, and so forth, are fabulous companies. I was on the board of Trust Company of the West for many years, which is acompany we were involved in starting, founding, and it grew to have $100billion under management. On the board, we had all sorts of reports that cameto us, including what we had invested in, the major investments, the biggestinvestments we’d made and the top ten investments. You know, there wouldbe three or four ventures, and these would be companies that had just beenstarted within the last twenty or thirty years, and here they were, hugeinvestments! Well, if they keep squeezing the venture business, that won’thappen anymore. It’ll go away; they’ll kill it. Because they don’t even knowwhat they’re dealing with.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right. I know from reading your CV that you have been at the top of two ofthe major venture capital organizations, the Western [Association of VentureCapitalists] and the National [Venture Capital Association]. It leads me towonder what role these two organizations are having nowadays to try toreverse what they think is the wrong tactics of the government. Edwards: The national association was set up to give the venture industry a way ofdealing with Washington.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is that so. Edwards: The western association was set up before the national association, a numberof years, and it was set up by just a group of western venture capitalistswanting to be together and share ideas and share investments. So the nationalassociation is aimed more at regulation of the venture business.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. And would you say that the western is more a social organization then,rather than a lobby? Edwards: Well, no, we meet almost monthly, I guess, during the winter, and we havespeakers. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: This is the western. Edwards: And that’s the time that the guys can get together and talk about their mutualproblems and share ideas. So it is—you say social; business/social, I’d say.And a lot of friends, good friends.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And deals consummated there? Edwards: I suppose [chuckling] that it works toward that. But as I say, there’s not thatmuch sharing that goes on much anymore. Sharing is the currency of thebusiness, and if company A shares ideas with companies B and C, thencompany A expects to have B and C share ideas with them. So that’s acurrency, sharing.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Lobbying then would be considered one of the major raison d’être for thenational association? Edwards: Of the National Venture Capital Association.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And what kind of inroads over the years has it had in shaping federal policy? Edwards: Phew. It’s tough. I don’t know how much—you know, I’ve been out of thatfor a while.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, maybe speak to the time when you held office. I can give you the yearsbecause it’s right here on your CV. Let’s start with the National VentureCapital Association; you were director from 1981 through 1986. Can youthink back to any particular issues that you were dealing with at that time? Edwards: One of the issues that we were most interested in those days was the capitalgains tax. And there was a representative from California [actually Wisconsin]named [William A.] Steiger who proposed and got through Congress areduction of the capital gains tax [Steiger Amendment of 1978], and he got itreduced all the way, with the help of Reagan, to 20 percent. That makes ahuge difference.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What had it been? Much higher?  Edwards: It had been 28 [percent] and then 36 [percent]. I don’t know. It moves around,but they got it down to 20 [percent]. It’s still in that area, and it’s been a hugebenefit to the venture business because we make all of our money with capitalgains. You take the profit out of it, and the venture capitalists go away, theentrepreneurs go away, and everything else goes away. So that was a veryimportant thing, and that’s something that we worked hard on to get done.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I think it was Pitch who was talking about legislation, I think it was in 1978,allowing pension funds to invest. Edwards: To invest—a huge source of revenue for the venture business, yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now did some of these changes at the federal level come about because thenational association was lobbying? Edwards: That’s a hard question. Things like that happen because lots of people dosomething, and to say it was because of the national association, I don’t knowthat we could do that, but we could certainly say they helped a lot. Theypushed in the right direction when they had something to push on.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you, as director, actually talk to congresspeople? Was it at that level? Edwards: I went back once to talk to one of the leading congressmen, flew back toWashington, and we actually paid for the privilege of seeing him.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Paid? Edwards: Paid. And this was a Republican leader of Congress.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Paid in what way? Edwards: Cash.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You’re kidding! Edwards: Yes, I made a donation to his campaign fund. It was suggested to us it wouldbe the right thing to do, and of course we did it. Then we got on an airplane to fly back, and we were to have a meeting with him. The meeting never tookplace; we talked to one of his assistants.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You should have asked for your money back! [chuckling] Did that surpriseyou? Edwards: Yes it did, and it really irritated me too. It really irritated me.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, I can imagine. Here’s your elected official, and you have to pay to get inthe door. Edwards: Anyway, that was just incredible. I’ve never done that again.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So it sounds to me as though the National Venture Capital Association wasworking behind the scenes. It wasn’t as though you had a lobbyist right therein Washington. Or am I wrong about that? Edwards: You know I can’t say whether—we’ve probably hired lobbyists to do onething or another, but I don’t know of specific occasions.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What more to say about the National Venture Capital Association? Edwards: It’s a very good organization that’s tried to protect venture capital. But if youread that article I gave you, we haven’t been very successful, becausebasically the federal government has found a way to strangle us. And thenoose is tightening, and our effectiveness is— That article points out thatthere were between 200 and 300 IPOs every year leading up to SarbanesOxley, and then the first year after Sarbanes-Oxley or maybe second year,2008, there were six.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Really! Edwards: Six IPOs in the United States.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You can divorce that from the current recession, can’t you? Edwards: Oh absolutely. That was strictly Sarbanes-Oxley and the market, but that’swhat’s happened. They’ve found a way to strangle the industry, and they’ll get it strangled, and it’ll be gone, and then the goose that lays the golden egg willbe dead.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, what is happening to the venture capital industry? The way I’m hearingit, it’s being strangled at the Washington level and then you have thispervasive recession on top of it all. Edwards: That’s tough, but that goes away. I was in— The worst recession in recentyears, before this one, was a period in 1972 to 1978 or so, and for us it startedin about 1970 with the IPO market going away.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You were barely getting off the ground, weren’t you, in 1968. Edwards: Well, we’d been around for quite a while then.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I’m thinking of the partnership. Edwards: So anyway, that was a long period where there were no IPOs. It was whenthey had stagflation; Carter was president. And so we had inflation, a lot ofinflation, 12 percent or something, and no growth. It was the worst of all andit was a long period of time. We got through it and—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How did you get through it? Edwards: Well, Reagan came in and they got—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, yes, but that’s not till 1980. Edwards: Well, they got control of inflation and got the economy going properly again.Carter had basically said the nation’s had it and our best days are over, andReagan changed the attitude. So in answer to the question, yes, [the economy]comes back and this will come back. I don’t know how well it’ll come back,but the more difficult they make it the less large the comeback will be.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: In that long period for much of the seventies that you’re talking about, howdid you stagger along? And did it make a difference that—? Edwards: It made a difference. It really made a difference. With us, it made a hugedifference because we made money to invest by selling old investments. There was a long period there where the IPO market was gone, and that source ofliquidity, of being able to turn over venture investments and take the moneyand reinvest it, went away. And so it had a major effect on us. Of course, Idon’t think it was much better for the partnerships, because they were justgetting going in 1970, and so it was a slow period for everybody.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But you were a partnership. Edwards: Well, I mean limited partnerships, where they go out and raise money fromother people.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Okay, I see. Edwards: We were a partnership, but I’m referring to the limited partnerships.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: At least you didn’t have what I would think would be the heavy responsibilityof other people’s money. Edwards: Right, that’s right. And that’s one of the reasons that we didn’t ever getinvolved with other people’s money. But in that period [telephone ringing] inthat period—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you need to get that? Edwards: Forget it. My family assets went down two thirds—a big loss.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What stage was your family at that point? Your children were young, werethey not? Did that cramp your style? Edwards: No, our style—we always lived well below where we could be. We alwayslived relatively modestly, and so it didn’t— I worried, but it turned around.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Several things you’ve said give me the impression, and I’ve gotten it fromother venture capitalists as well, that you’re basically optimistic people. Edwards: Oh, I think that’s right. We wouldn’t be in the business if we weren’t.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You’re talking about a number of recession years here. You’re talking what,five, six, seven years. Did you ever think—  Edwards: Well, for us it was probably closer to seven or maybe eight.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you ever think, why have I done this? Edwards: No, I was enjoying it too much.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Really? Even when it wasn’t doing well. Edwards: But in 1972 I was back in New York, and I went into a gallery where theywere having a show with the work of Ben Shahn, who was a calligrapherand—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, and a cartoonist. Edwards: Well, yes, he did that a little bit. But anyway, the cover of the program theyhad in this gallery was a portrait by Shahn. He was holding his face like this,and he had this really worried look on his face. I took that cover and I put it ina frame and it hangs in my office because it reminds me of what I felt like in1972, and it was pretty glum, you know. And so I was worried. When I sawthat picture, I said, “That’s exactly the way I feel, and I don’t want to forgetthis.” And I haven’t.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] But you didn’t give up. Edwards: Oh no, no, no.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, well, tenacity as well. Edwards: Well, it’s paid off pretty well.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All through that bad period, were you fairly confident that this was a cycleand there would be an upswing? Edwards: Yes, I’m sure I was. As crazy as it might seem, I was probably optimistic,because I am optimistic. Anyone that’s bet against this nation for any periodof years has been wrong, and I think it’s true today. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And maybe you have to have a bit of an historian’s eye, too, to see that therealways have been dips but there’ve always been—when we started out, and we’re still going, and we’re still a powerful,promising nation, despite all the stuff you read in the newspapers.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I think most Americans know it in their hearts. Edwards: I think they do; I think they really do. Even if they’re out of work, if they’velost their jobs, I think they haven’t lost their optimism.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, getting back to the business plan: were you being flooded by businessplans? How did that part of it work? Edwards: Well, with us we’ve had a different kind of a history because we never hadany outside money; we had only our own money. All during the sixties wewere very much on the front of the cutting-edge of venture capital. Starting inthe early seventies, when the big partnerships started to come together withsubstantial amounts of money available, and then they could go back to thetrough and get more money, and more money, and more money. They thentook over and they were the leading venture capitalists. We were wellconnected in the industry and we did all right, but we were not creating thegreat companies of recent years, because those have been done by the limitedpartnerships that have a lot of money. By the way, the ventures kept getting more expensive. I think I mentioned toyou last time, there was a time back in the sixties when you could start asemiconductor company, the whole thing including building a fabmillion. Now it’d cost $2 billion or more to build a fab, one fab. And so thegame has changed; it’s gotten to be a much bigger game. When Amgen wasstarted, as I recall, the original amount of money raised in the first effort toraise money for it was $20 million. Big money. That’s beyond our reach.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is there less and less role for you as a private investor in today’s world justbecause of what you’re saying? That it takes so much money? Edwards: For me there’s a lot less. [laughter] I’m eighty years old! And I’m not doingany ventures, no ventures. 60<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, I know! Well, for people like you. Edwards: No, I think there’s room. It’s not as much room as there was back in thesixties, but there’s always room for a venture capitalist picking up an idea,early, from some student. And so there’s room and they’re there.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How do you distinguish what you are doing from angel investing? Edwards: What we were doing when we were active? What we were doing?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. Edwards: Well, we were basically angel investors but bigger—we had more moneythan— We were mainstream venture capital in the sixties.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And also you were helping to manage companies. That is not necessarily whatan angel investor is going to do. Is that true? Edwards: He’s going to be involved. To the degree he’s capable, he’ll be involved.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see, so an angel investor would sit on a board. Edwards: Sure, oh absolutely, and he’ll perform the whole—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So it is a thin line between what you were doing and what an angel investorwould do. Edwards: Absolutely. Angels are back there at the very bottom trying to pick thesethings up when nobody knows about them and when they’re just a dream; it’ssome guy with a briefcase.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Should we talk about one of these many companies that you have been activewith as a way of illustrating some of these principles? Or do you think we’vedone enough about the nuts and bolts of venture capital? Edwards: Oh there’s something to be learned everywhere, and every situation isdifferent and you could talk about any one of them. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is there one to discuss on that list you sent me? Presumably you picked outthose companies because they were stellar. Edwards: These were companies where I sat on the board. [chuckling] Well, you couldpick any one of them and talk about it, and it’d be quite distinct from everyother one. I made so many mistakes! I was chairman of Acurex. I was on the board from the time it was started in1966, I think it was. And we started out and we were a government contractor.We had a bunch of very, very bright PhD and master’s [degree]aerothermodynamicists, mostly out of Stanford. So we started a company thatwas in the defense contracting business, and they were doing very advancedresearch on reentry vehicles, nose cones, outer space thermodynamics andvery, very advanced. And everything was going very well; we were growing nicely and alongcomes the Vietnam War, and Lyndon Johnson becomes president. He didn’treally want to pay for the war, but he wanted to fight the war, and so he cutback everything he could cut back except guns and butter. And there goes ourbusiness! Because we were doing way out, cutting-edge research in thethermodynamics of outer space.So we decided, in our great wisdom, that we needed to have a foot in thecommercial business, and we bought a company—incidentally a company thatI had been involved in very early on called Illumitronics, and they made verymundane stuff. They made packaging equipment for the candy industry andthe food industry. And they made things like weigh price labelers; you couldrun steaks or something over this thing and it would label each steak with howmuch it weighed and what the price was, or you could have it on a canningline. It would make sure that the level of the food in each can was up to whereit should be. All kind of things but very mundane. And we thought we can goin there with our engineers and we can turn this into a fabulous company. Not!And we struggled with that thing! [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What went wrong? Edwards: Well, we just had no idea what we were getting into. This is a company thathad grown up with a bunch of guys out of a garage someplace, and they haddeveloped systems of inventory control and movement of pieces and parts andmanufacturing, all sorts of things. And they developed them just kind of out ofthe back of their head, and they were very kludged together, and we saw thisthing and said, “Oh well, those are ridiculous systems. We’ll do it the rightway. And so we decided to do it the right way and we changed everything and then nothing worked! [laughter] And so, anyway, and then we struggled withthat for years.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that one of the living dead? Edwards: No, it wasn’t the living dead. I think it finally went about thirty times our coston the thing but it took a long time. I’m not even going to tell you how long ittook because I don’t want this in the long-term record that I was chairman of acompany that took that long to get to someplace. We made some mistakes buteach one of them is totally different.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. Is there any pattern, though, about getting return on your money? Edwards: Well, you try to be in things where you can get a major return, because you’renot going to get a major return on a lot of them. And so the ones that you doget a major return on have to be big, so you’re always looking for 40 percent ayear return or something, to make up for the times you get 0 percent.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And what are you looking at? Obviously you’re looking at where the companyis, but I would think it would also be contingent on what the externaldynamics are, I mean what’s happening politically, et cetera. Edwards: All those things, but you want a market that’s big enough to be significant. It’sgot to be a market that’s got billions of dollars of possible revenue.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And did you feel it was largely your role, when you were the major investor,to say, “Okay guys, this is the time.” Edwards: I learned that gradually; I learned that gradually. Anyway, each one of thosethings [companies we invested in] on there is totally different. Software,communications—Hambrecht & Quist was an investment banking firm. TrustCompany of the West was a bank, a trust company. Western Atlas was in theoil business; they’re all different. Software, microwave communications,they’re all different. And that’d be the same if you went through all thecompanies I’ve been in; they’ve all been different, and I’ve been invested inupward of 200 or maybe 300.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Really, that many? Edwards: Over the many years, yes. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But would you say that there are some basic investment/business principlesthat apply across the board? Edwards: Well, if you want a big company, you’ve got to have a big market. That’scertainly one of them. If you want to have a good company, you’ve got tohave capable, bright, experienced managers all through the management.Those are very broad requirements. And then you get off into the varioustechnologies, and so forth; they’re all different, different markets.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I can imagine how that would keep you stimulated! Edwards: I would say, although we never really knew what we were doing, it’s beenreally fun and exciting, and every day has got new problems and newopportunities. So it’s been a great career. I started out in the oil business, andit would have been a wonderful career and it would have been fun and thereare a lot of similarities. But when I look back on that decision I made to leavethe oil business and go do something else—I’m happy with that and making itin Silicon Valley was just serendipity, I think. I happened to be in exactly theright place at the right time and then stuck with it. Those are the things that Idid—two were lucky and one had some intelligence in it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I’m glad you brought up Silicon Valley because I’d like to hear yourideas about how the sheer geography of this region has played into venturecapital. Edwards: Well, we talked about this before, I believe. It’s a blessed area. God was goodto the Arabs when he put all the oil under Saudi Arabia and Iran, but God wasgood to Silicon Valley when he put Stanford and Berkeley here, when the sunshines and the weather’s so fabulous. And we have a lovely city, SanFrancisco, a cultural place that’s an interesting city nearby. And then westarted to produce some—what turned out to be—entrepreneurs; Hewlett andPackard, the Varian brothers. Bill Shockley came in with semiconductors.Some of these early people. We had a professor at Stanford named Termanwho encouraged Hewlett and Packard. I don’t know about the Varians; hemay have had something to do with them. But it started to come together.There started to be something happening here. It was a nice place to live. And then, as the business expanded, the attorneys we needed knew how tostart companies and solve problems. The architects learned how to buildfactories and space, the builders learned how to build clean rooms. Thebankers learned that they could deal with these little companies and do verywell with them. And the venture capitalists were very important. The most important were the entrepreneurs, and I’d say second in importance would bethe venture capitalists. So we had all these things come together and they became a critical mass.And the engineers liked it here for all the reasons—the weather and all the restof it. But also, there were jobs here. And if they went someplace else—Denver, Boise, you name it—or Minneapolis, there wouldn’t be that manyjobs. And if they lost a job or got bored with a job or didn’t like their boss,they could go across the street and get an increase in salary and anotherinteresting job. And so the engineers liked it here, and this whole critical masshas gone forward. The government is trying to strangle it at the moment, butit’s still here. It’s an unusual place, just a wonderful confluence of talent andevents and meteorology and whatnot.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And hard to dissect one as being more important than the other. Edwards: Well, they’re all important and we needed them all, but some of them werecreated because of the need. Someone stepped forward and they said, “I canbuild that.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: There’s a lot been written about the Silicon Valley culture as an explanationfor why so much innovation has happened here. Edwards: Well, I think I might have mentioned this to you in our last conversation.Theculture aspect is very interesting. The people that came to the United States allpulled up stakes somewhere—Ireland, Germany, somewhere. And they cameto the United States so they had a certain something in their nature whichmade them willing to take a risk. Then they started moving west, and they’dpull up stakes on a farm in Connecticut, and they’d try to find a better farm inOhio or something, and then they kept moving west, west, west, alwayslooking for something better, a better situation for their families, and so forth.So by the time they got to California, they were a pretty rarified bunch ofpeople. They’d had generations of people who were willing to take a risk andmove on. So California was populated by these people that came from— My mothercame from Minnesota, my father came from Louisiana, they came toCalifornia for some reason, and they got here—a whole state full of thesepeople. And so Silicon Valley is here with all these people that were willing totake a risk—and fail. They were willing to fail. They’d take a risk and theywould fail, and if they failed, well, that’s too bad, we’ll try again. You spokeof culture—that’s the culture of Silicon Valley.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And that willingness to pick yourself up and start all over again—  Edwards: Yes, start again.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: —is very indicative of this area. Edwards: Absolutely.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Route 68—what is the number? Edwards: Route 128.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, which, of course, is an industrial area, but my impression is that theculture is different. Edwards: It is different. It’s a very establishment culture back there. It’s the families thathave been there for generations, and society is built up around this structure,and it’s not nearly as flexible as California.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You don’t want to fail there, do you? Edwards: No, you sure don’t. Failing is bad! Working for a big company for your entirecareer and getting to be near the top or at the top—that’s good. That’s very bigtime.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I remember Bill Draper’s excitement about venture capital moving abroad.And he particularly mentioned India. Edwards: He went off to India.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is some of this culture being replicated elsewhere? Edwards: It’s hard to replicate. [interruption to change tape][End Audio File 3] Edwards: So the question was—taking venture capital abroad.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, and how much of Silicon Valley culture is replicated. Edwards: Well, it worked so well here because it was in the United States and we werefree and we had a legal system that worked pretty well. We had a financialsystem that was supportive and worked. The banking, and all that, was inplace and it was sturdy and it worked. Many things of that nature are requiredfor venture capital to thrive.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And then of course some of the government regulations that you talked about,like the capital gains tax. Edwards: Yes, that’s right. Absolutely. So you go to China and you’ve got thecommunist government sitting on you, directing how things go. You go toJapan and you’ve got Japan, Inc., where the ideas all come from the top andthey say we’re going to do this business, we’re going to be in this business,we’re going to be in this business, we’re not going to be in those businesses,and so forth. Those are not good places for venture capital.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, very closed, isn’t it? Edwards: Yes, and they don’t have the flexibility. Now I’ve got an investment— I’vetried to get into China with a venture sort of approach, and I’ve failed, andI’ve failed. But I now have one that I’m hopeful for, and I think it has a betterchance than any of the others I’ve been in. [chuckling] And I’ve got aninvestment in India which I’m moderately optimistic about. But even so, itisn’t like it is here. The United States is unique in our amount of freedom—and getting to be less all the time. But that is a wonderful thing about here,and that’s why venture capital has been so successful. For thirty years I had an office at 3000 Sand Hill Road, and it looked out onthe middle of the campus there. And I saw a busload of Japanese come in, awhole bus load. And they got out of the bus and they kind of went—choom—in all sorts of directions; they all had their assignments to go and do this anddo this. They were trying to figure out how venture capital worked, and 3000Sand Hill was the international capital of venture capital.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Still is, is it not?  Edwards: It’s pretty damned important, but now it’s widened out. Instead of being thereonly, it’s in a radius of half a mile or a quarter of a mile east of 280. But it’sstill right there. And so they were there to try to figure out how are theseAmericans doing venture capital? They didn’t have a prayer, not a prayer. Inever saw a busload of Japanese come in after that. I’m sure they were therechecking us out, just as we might go look at an automobile plant in Japan, butanyway.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because of this rigidity or closed-ness? Edwards: Yes, and I mean India is a place that’s been basically socialist and beencontrolled by the federal government. Bill Draper started a venture deal inIndia. It was basically Indian-oriented. Practically all of his good investmentswere here, where the Indian CEO was here and the work was being done inIndia.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why did you decide to move abroad? Edwards: Because I think it’s a big world, it’s a big world. And there are opportunities.So I was hoping I could find something that would grow, and maybe I have[telephone ringing] in what I’m doing now. I wonder where my housekeeperis.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: If you think that that’s enough on venture capital, I would like to turn to someof your extracurricular activities. Have we covered, to your satisfaction,venture capital? Edwards: We could talk about venture capital for days. Have we covered it? I thinkwe’ve covered a lot of it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is there anything in a summing-up fashion that you would like to say? Edwards: Well, I’m awfully glad I’ve been here these years and I’ve had a fabulous lifein Silicon Valley and with venture capital and I’m very happy with it. I’m anold man, and if I go tomorrow I’m not unhappy about the whole thing. It’sworked out fabulously.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: We don’t want you to go tomorrow. All right, let’s see. You know I took afew notes from our conversation off tape last time.  Edwards: By the way, did you read that book [Evolution of Religion] I gave you?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, I did. Edwards: Did you really?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I skimmed it. Edwards: You should go to the back of it. Read the last couple of chapters and then ifyou’re interested go back and look at more.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I will. I remember your telling me that you wrote that book with your childrenin mind. One of the things you said last time was that you wanted to discussteaching finances to your children. Edwards: Mmm—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: No? [chuckling] Edwards: I started out early on kind of running a bank account for them and puttingtheir allowance into the bank account and then they could draw out of it, andso forth. And they’ve lived in this house, and we talk about whatever we’retalking about. So I guess I have had some effect on their thinking aboutbusiness.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you see it in how they run their lives? Edwards: Well, I’m happy to see they’re all working and they’re doing interestingthings.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes! [chuckling] Well, you have a very charming younger son. I canguarantee that. Edwards: He’s my youngest son, that’s Paul.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: He’s a sweetheart.  Edwards: Little fellow. He is a sweetheart, a Berkeley grad. An Old Blue along with mywife.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is she too? Well, I’m glad we’ve got some Berkeley connection here. Edwards: Yes, we have Berkeley connections.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well then, the Hoover Institution. You have been on that board— Edwards: A long time.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It’s here somewhere if I can just find my notes. From 1993! Edwards: Mmm.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How did you come to be appointed to the board? Edwards: Well, a friend of mine thought I would be interested in Hoover ,and so I wentto a couple of meetings, and I was interested in Hoover. What Hoover does isvery harmonious with my feeling about the world.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What do you mean by that? Edwards: Well, it believes in freedom. That’s the main theme of the Hoover Institution,is freedom. It has the reputation of being an archconservative organization. Ithink about 30 or 35 percent of the fellows—and there are 140 fellows atHoover, very bright people, men of great accomplishment before they getthere—about 30 or 35 percent of our fellows are registered Democrats! Ithappens to be an organization that seeks a solution to problems, and it’s aimedat long-term problems, what we would call in the venture business basicresearch. We’re not trying to solve the problem of today in Washington, DC.We’re trying to look forward and see what works and how to improve oursystem.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And when you say system—you mean economic, political, everything. Edwards: The American economic, social, the whole thing, the whole thing. So that’swhat they do. I am so appreciative for having been born in this country and 70have been free in my entire life to come and go and do as I want to do—it’s agreat blessing. When I think about other places where I could have beenborn—Soviet Union, Communist China, Cambodia under Pol Pot, Cuba underCastro. You go to a socialist or communist nation and you don’t havefreedom. You go to Africa where there’s nothing—there’s not much in theway of philosophy and so forth going on there. It’s a kind of a trying-tosurvive place. I wasn’t born in any of those places. I was born here, and I’veenjoyed freedom my entire life. It’s been a great benefit, and it’s why SiliconValley exists—it’s the freedom and the people that came here to do what theywanted to do. Hoover—it stands for freedom as the principal thing; it’s economic freedom,political freedom, and individual freedom. And that I believe inwholeheartedly, and God knows we need it because the government iscontinuing to get bigger and bigger and every year they’re passing more laws,more control, and I just find that difficult. I’m sorry to see that happening. Aswe talked about when we first sat down—what’s happened to the venturebusiness because the government is encroaching, encroaching, andcontrolling. It’s happening right now, you know. The government is theprincipal owner of General Motors, and on and on and on, and it’s takingmore and more control. And I think that—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Excuse me—but that too is cyclical, just the way the economic— Edwards: Yes, it is, it can cycle back and forth, and I think Hoover might be able to be avoice that’ll lead it away from the federal government or any governmentcontrolling everybody all the time.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And how exactly does it do that? By publishing policy reports and that sort ofthing? Edwards: Well, we’ve had many people from Hoover in the federal government—workthere. But we do publish. We have a major outreach program. We bring themedia in to Hoover. We bring eighty or ninety people from the media toHoover every year for a week, two or three at a time come to Hoover andspend a week,and they can do whatever they want to do. They can do nothingor they can be with the fellows and talk to the fellows, and if they’re interestedin some particular area they can go to someone who’s specializing in that area.So they have had some, I assume, effect on the media a bit. We publish books;we have a television program—we’ve had it anyway; [it’s] not running rightnow. We have Internet; we have a publication every day, the Hoover [Daily]Report; it’s on the Internet. And lots and lots of other things of that nature.  We are trying to educate the nation on the virtues of freedom and the virtuesof the things that have made America a great nation now for 220 years. Soanyway—that’s what Hoover does, and it’s got some great people there.Condoleezza Rice is a Hoover fellow. The guy that was the head of theCouncil of Economic Advisors is a Hoover fellow—the one that just passed.Many, many people go on from Hoover into the federal government and thencome back to Hoover.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. Are they fellows for a given term of time? Edwards: No. They’re fellows until they’re asked to be no longer a fellow. George [P.]Shultz is a fellow; Milton Friedman was a fellow at Hoover. We have somegreat men, great, great men that are at Hoover today that are doing some ofthe leading, most innovative thinking—flat tax, et cetera, which would be agreat assist to the nation if we took the burden of that off of the people. I heard a talk once from a Nobel laureate—what’s his name?—I’ve forgotten.Anyway, it was a Nobel laureate and he wanted to give a talk, and he gave atalk on what makes nations great. And I thought, I know what makes nationsgreat—it’s freedom, it’s the legal system, it’s the financial system, currency.It’s all this stuff. And so [I said to myself], “I’m not going to go to that. Ialready know the answer.” Then I finally said I’m going to go and hear what he has to say. And I went,and he didn’t say a word about any of those things. He said, “The thing thatmakes nations great is when the industry of the nation is the least encumberedby extraneous costs, whether the cost is plaintiff’s attorneys that are suing himall the time and shaking him down for money, whether the cost is taxation,whether the cost is regulation, whether the cost is adding more and moreinsurance to insure yourself against all this stuff.” All of these things that aretotally unproductive; they don’t produce a thing. They just sit on top of theproductive process weighting it down. You get enough of that stuff and thenthe system doesn’t work. He said a good example of a system that didn’t work is Russia, becauseeverything came down from the top. They did all the planning from the top.They did five-year plans, and then they tried to execute those plans as opposedto having them start at the bottom and come up. They all came down from thetop. And so the planner would have to decide—the shoe business needs thismany nails, and he needs this much leather, and they need to produce thismany shoes, and they went off and did that. Then they produced shoes thatnobody really wanted, [chuckling] that didn’t work very well, that came apart,or whatever. And that was a result of all this weight on industry that was justburdening it down rather than letting it go and let it be free and let it try toserve the public, try to serve the market. And I think that’s true. And the more we load it up with regulation, government control, control of people that don’tknow what they’re doing most of the time—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And yet look what’s happening right now. Many people argue that some ofthe difficulty that we have right now is that the financial institutions were notadequately regulated. Edwards: Absolutely, absolutely. They were probably well-enough regulated butnobody was paying attention, and the people doing the regulating— And therewere warnings about the dangers of derivatives coming from very brightpeople, and nobody paid any attention. So I think that having someorganization in Washington that could supervise this and blow the dangerwhistle—not blow it all the time, but occasionally blow it—and that wouldalso know that the more burden you put on the economy the less successfulit’s going to be. And there’s a lot of burden on it now. There’s so muchaccounting burden coming out of Sarbanes-Oxley—read that thing I gave you.It’s right on venture capital, and I think it would be useful for you.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, I will definitely read it. Edwards: Anyway, Hoover I think is a great think tank, and they are not aiming foranything except success of the nation, and some very, very bright people aredoing the work. Now you know more about Hoover than you wanted to.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It’s always been a name without much attached to it in my mind, so I’m gladto hear. Let’s talk a little bit about philanthropy. Edwards: Let me say one more thing.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. Edwards: A few years ago the magazine The Economist, from out of London, ranked thethink tanks of the world. They took twhat they considered the top twenty-fivethink tanks and then they ranked them on mental firepower and assets andwhat-all—all sorts of impact on the world. They ranked Hoover number onein the world.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Really!  Edwards: And number two was a think tank in Peru or Ecuador. It was a man that waspushing the idea of property rights, something that simple. But the peasants,the natives, lived on ground they didn’t own. They had nothing that they couldcall their own and they could take to the bank and borrow money on oranything. So he was just trying to get property rights installed in the nation,and they picked that as number two. I just thought I’d toss that in. Go ahead.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, there’s a lot of philanthropy to talk about, but you wanted particularly totalk about the Boys and Girls Club and the Tipping Point [Community]. Arethose two good ones to talk about? Edwards: Wonderful, wonderful.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, tell me why you chose those particular organizations. Edwards: Well, many people are born in this country that really don’t have much of achance. They’re born in a family that was not prepared to raise children ortake responsibility for the children or even capable of taking responsibility.These are our citizens of the future, and they’re boys and girls. They’re littlekids. And you can’t take the place of the parents, but you can lean in thatdirection, maybe even affect how parents behave. So these kids were gettingout of school over in East Palo Alto and East Menlo Park and East RedwoodCity; they were getting into trouble, and they were not trying to learnanything. They didn’t like school and et cetera, et cetera. The idea of the Boys and Girls Club was to get them at an early age and givethem someplace to go when their parents were both working or away orwhatever, where they could get some constructive training and where theycould play games or whatever, but not on a street corner and not involved inpeddling drugs. And so that’s what the Boys and Girls Club is, it’s very, verybasic. And they’re doing a great job. They’ve got major facilities in all threeof the cities I mentioned, and they’re all over the country. They’re in SanFrancisco and everywhere. They’re doing a great job everywhere at a very,very essential job and they’re having an effect. It’s hard to measure, butthey’re certainly pushing it in the right direction.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What sorts of things do they offer the children? Edwards: They offer all kind of help with homework; they offer remedial classes andthat sort of thing. They offer activities like art and they offer sports. Theywant the kids to be there because the kids want to be there and the kids’ll gothere. So it can’t just be drudgery—it has to be fun. And yet they do help them with their homework, and there are people out of the community who go andcounsel these kids. So it’s a great organization, nationwide. And I just supportthe clubs that are right here.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It’s been around for decades, hasn’t it? Edwards: Oh a long, long time. And I think they do a good job. I go visit themoccasionally. You asked [about] another one. Oh the Tipping Point. It’s abright young guy who was in New York and came into contact with a fund inNew York, something like Tipping Point. It’s young people in this company,in the Tipping Point, young people who are in this area, in San Francisco andthe Bay Area, who are working at the very lowest level of philanthropy, withorganizations that someone has started that don’t have the kind of resourcesthey need and that have a very difficult time raising money. And TippingPoint finds these organizations, and it takes money it’s raised from the generalpublic, well, basically from philanthropists, and it takes the money and puts itto work. It’s working at a level that the Bay Area philanthropists wouldn’t getto.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because it’s way below the radar. Edwards: It’s way down, way down below the radar, very basic stuff. But people thatare well motivated and doing the right thing and struggling and trying—and soTipping Point is supporting those people. And it could be in all kind of ways.It could be just providing housing for somebody, but more likely it’s going tobe some sort of an active philanthropy of some sort.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And for a set period of time? Edwards: As long as needed. As long as they feel that they’re needed, until theorganization can get going on its own.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you know what their success rate is? Edwards: Well, it’s only been going about three or four years, so it’s a little bit early forthat. But I think the success rate of the one in New York has been excellent,and I’ve forgotten what the name of that is. So it’s taking money fromphilanthropic-oriented people and channeling it into a place that it wouldnever get otherwise.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Sounds wonderful.  Edwards: It is wonderful; it’s a great charity.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I have listed the Pacific Legal Foundation. Edwards: Well, that’s back toward Hoover.The Pacific Legal Foundation is what it says.It’s a legal foundation that is looking to preserve property rights. So they willtake cases of someplace where the EPA, or something, has applied some ruleentirely incorrectly and has basically taken the value of somebody’s propertyaway from them. So they take those selectively; they frequently get to theSupreme Court with these cases, and their success rate is high. Basically, it’slooking out for private property, which is the freedom to own property and nothave it taken away from you by the government.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And that means things like eminent domain? Edwards: Right. Absolutely. I’ve forgotten the details of it, but there was somecranberry farmer back in Connecticut or somewhere, back on the East Coast.And the EPA came in and basically took his property away from him becausethey said he was on wetlands—and it probably was wetlands.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You sort of need that for cranberries! Edwards: It was still wetlands, but they just basically took it. “You can’t be thereanymore.” That’s the kind of thing that they’d fight. That’s the sort of thingthey do. They’re looking to preserve freedom from being usurped by thegovernment.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And is the Pacific Legal Foundation kind of a spin-off of the Hoover? Edwards: No, no, no. It’s a separate entity. They’re now doing things that arenationwide, but the name is the Pacific Legal Foundation and it’s basically aproperty rights thing.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Then I know you sit on a Stanford board. Edwards: A Stanford board? I’ve been involved in fundraising at Stanford for manyyears.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: No, there was a board that I picked up somewhere.  Edwards: Oh could it be SIEPR? That’s the Stanford Institute for Economic PolicyResearch.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Exactly. Edwards: I’m on that board.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, do you want to say something about that? Edwards: Well, that’s what it says it is. The idea was conceived by George Shultz whowas a Hoover fellow. George Shultz, by the way, also had four cabinet posts.He was head of Office of Management and Budget, he was Secretary ofLabor, Secretary of the Treasury, and Secretary of State. Of all the men I’vemet in my lifetime, this is the man that I admire—I just think he’s the finestman I’ve ever met in my life. His instincts, his morals, his values, hisstandards are solid as a rock. Wonderful. He decided that on the Stanford campus we had economists in the engineeringschool, we had economists in the business school, we had economists in theSchool of Economics, we had economists in the law school and other places—all over the place in various departments. And they needed someplace theycould be together, you know, pull them all together. And so the StanfordInstitute of Economic Policy Research was founded. They are an educationalorganization. Hoover is tangentially an educational organization. I’ll mentionthat in a minute, but anyway, they support a lot of economics students withfellowships and financial aid, and they have projects going on that they areinterested that are being done by students. And that’s what it is. It’s a veryinteresting group. Hoover isn’t intended to have fellows that are faculty members. But we have anumber of joint appointments with Stanford, or that’ll be a Hoover fellow thatspends part-time teaching, so he’s a part-time teacher, part-time Hooverfellow. The Hoover fellow is doing what he wants to do and he likes that, buthe also wants to teach.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is that something new to have this teaching possibility? Edwards: Relatively new, and it’s growing pretty rapidly. If I can just tell you a littleyarn—the provost, [John] Etchemendy, is in charge of the various schools.The man that was the head of the Department of Economics in the School ofArts and Sciences wrote a letter to Etchemendy talking about what hadhappened to the Department of Economics—was it economics? No, it was the Department of Political Science at Stanford. He said that a Hoover fellow hadcome in and become involved teaching, part-time teaching, and then hadbecome head of the department. And he said, “When this all started, Stanfordwas not considered one of the better schools of political science in the nation.Harvard was [number] one and Stanford was totally out of the picture.” Atthat time Stanford was considered two and Harvard one. And he toldEtchemendy that he thought that pretty soon Harvard would be two andStanford would be one because of Hoover fellows. Anyway, I just thought I’dthrow that in. You seem a little incredulous about Hoover. I thought I’d justtoss that in.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You seem to be a pretty good promoter of the Hoover Institution. Edwards: Well, I believe in it. I believe in what they do.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] Well, then a man should speak to his passions! Edwards: Well, I do feel passionate about that. I feel passionate about freedom. I wouldlike to leave my children some part of the amount of freedom that I’veenjoyed in my life. Of the things that I could leave them, nothing could bemore precious—including cash.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And you’ve told them that? Edwards: Oh yes, yes. Of all the gifts I’ve been given, freedom is the greatest gift exceptmy life.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I think we’re winding up, but I’m wondering if you want to say anything moreabout your children and your family in general? Edwards: Well, I don’t have much to say. Just this—it is the rare person who leavesbehind anything of greater value to the world than the offspring. There aresome people—the Winston Churchills, the Hitlers, the Stalins—there aresome great men, the John Lockes and on and on, who have left behind morethan that—Thomas Jefferson, George Washington leave more than that. Butthe great bulk of us will die, and our death will be like a pebble in a lake;there’ll be a few rings that last for a few years and gone. And the one thingwe’ll leave behind is our offspring, and that is important to me, and I knowthat that’s the most important thing I’ll ever do. So that’s what I have to sayabout my family. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That’s very nice. Well, is that a good place to end? Do you want to say more? Edwards: I brought myself to the verge of tears!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, it was a very nice statement. I appreciate that and I appreciate your time. Edwards: Oh you’re very welcome. I’m happy to add this to the history of the world. Idon’t suppose anybody’s ever going to pay any attention to it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh don’t be so sure! Don’t be so sure. Edwards: Those are my feelings based on a lifetime of thinking and trying.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, you’ve certainly done that. Edwards: Thank you.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And now you can count some successes, I would say, in all regards. Edwards: Well, I hope so. 
Interviewer: It’s January 13, 2009! Dennis: Right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Happy New Year. Let’s start back with your family. Dennis: One week from a major change in our country’s well-being.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That’s right. I know. That’s quite a historic transition. Dennis: Yeah, and it is. All right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Tell me about your parents and where you lived and what it was like growingup in that family. Dennis: Family background. Well, starting with my grandparents—my grandfather’sname was Chester Weaver, and he came to California, I think, in 1898. Theylived in La Porte, Indiana. My mother was eleven at the time of the SanFrancisco Earthquake in 1906, so that would indicate that she was four or fiveyears old at the time that he first came out here—five or six years old. Theycame out to visit, and his brother worked for the Studebaker Company in SanFrancisco. Studebaker had factory branches that were owned by the factory.Of course they were selling horse-drawn wagons, and Studebaker’s bigbusiness, which grew up during World War I, was in military wagons drawnby horses. A lot of people don’t know that John Studebaker actually started inPlacerville, California. Did you know that?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: No. I certainly didn’t. Dennis: He started in Placerville making wheelbarrows for the miners! And he didbetter than a lot of the miners did looking for gold. They all neededwheelbarrows, and so that’s what got John Studebaker started, and then hewent back to South Bend, Indiana and got into the wagon business, and soforth. Well, my grandfather’s brother said, “Chester—how long are you going to behere? You’re just visiting.” And Chester allowed that they might stay two or three months. “Well, what are you going to do, Chester? You can’t just sitaround the house for two or three months. We’re going to put you to work!”So he put him to work in the wagon business while he was here and then lateron they moved to California. I don’t know just exactly when they moved, butshortly thereafter. And then the brother got sent up to Portland, Oregon, and Chester Weaverfound that he was in charge of the Studebaker branch in San Francisco. Heused to tell me a story which was really sort of a very interesting story. He hada friend back in La Porte who was starting a business. The friend said,“Chester, you know I really need some financing and I’d like to sell you halfof my business.” And Chester said, “Well, how much money is half of yourbusiness going to take—how much would it take to buy half your business?”And his friend said, “Well, how much do you have?” And he allowed thathe’d saved $13,000 working in his father’s bank. And $13,000 in the mid1890s was a lot of money. And his friend said, “Well, that would be enough.That would be enough.” Well, the friend’s name was Harvey Firestone. But my grandfather didn’t doit. And he decided not to do it, and he used to tell me later on, he said, “Youknow, Reid, if I’d done that we would have had to live in Akron and insteadwe came to California and I’ve had a wonderful life out here and just haveloved California. So he and Harvey Firestone remained very, very closefriends as long as they were both alive. But I remember that $13,000 numberbecause it’s sort of critical. Then my mother and father were married, I think, in 1916. My father hadworked for General Electric; he was an electrical engineer. But after hemarried my mother he left General Electric and went into the automobilebusiness. My grandfather said the biggest decision he ever had to make waswhen Studebaker divided the highly profitable wagon business and the highlyunprofitable automobile business into two sections, and you had to decidewhich one you were going to go with. He wrestled with that and finallydecided he was going to go with automobiles.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you know why? Dennis: Well, I think he went with automobiles primarily because it was the newthing. And he had maybe more vision than some others. If you take a look—Ihave some interesting tapes that are the words of Harvey Firestone butnarrated by somebody else. Harvey Firestone talks about the fact that the NewYork bankers thought that the automobile was a fad that came over fromEurope—that the automobile was really not going to survive in the UnitedStates—that the horse and buggy was a much more reliable proposition. Sothese companies had a lot of trouble getting financing back in those days. Firestone had a tremendous amount of trouble getting financing. And it’shard—we’re so married to the automobile today, it’s hard to imagine it. But at any rate—and then as Studebaker got more and more involved withWorld War I and the wagon manufacturing for that, they decided to get rid oftheir factory branches, so they sold—I don’t know what the arrangement was,but at any rate, my grandfather ended up buying the Studebakerdistributorship for California, Oregon, Washington, and Honolulu—theHawaiian Islands and the Far East—so he had a big territory. My father diedwhen I was seven. I really do not have any recollection of my father at all.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But he was an engineer? Dennis: He was an electrical engineer. And my grandfather, who did not go to college,sort of took me under his wing and we were very, very close. They lived aboutseven blocks away from us in San Francisco. I was born in San Francisco; Iwas raised in San Francisco and we lived close by. They had an Irish cookwho made absolutely wonderful pancakes on Sunday morning. So I would geton my bicycle on Saturday, late afternoon, and run over to their house, stayovernight, so I could join them for pancakes the next morning and then weoften would go driving on Sunday, down the peninsula here. He loved to keeptrack of things that were going on. But he sort of drilled into me that I wasgoing to go to college and I was going to become an engineer. This was backin the days when you did what your parents and grandparents told you to do.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And why did he pick engineering? Was it because his son had done that? Dennis: No, no, it would be his son-in-law that was an engineer.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh that’s right. Dennis: Sure, it’d be his son-in-law that was the engineer. No—he was a veryconservative individual, as a lot of people were at that time. He was scared todeath of Franklin Roosevelt and the New Deal, and he said, “Reid, about theonly thing that we can leave you that they can’t take away is a goodeducation.” He said, “I want you to go to college and I want you to become anengineer and then I don’t care what you do. You do whatever you want withyour life, but you always will have your engineering to fall back on and theycan’t ever take it away from you. That was the philosophy at the time. Well, you know, I got my first electric train when I was seven years old and Iloved playing with electric trains. I liked modifying them; I liked coming upwith new circuits. I would take them apart, and I can remember they came out with a new reversing mechanism for Lionel trains. I had some old engines thatdidn’t have this automatic reversing in them, so I went down and I can stillremember—I think it cost me $2 to buy the little relay mechanism that wasinstalled in the newer models. So I bought one of these things—I went homeand took a couple of trains apart, took the one apart that had this in it and tookthe one apart that didn’t have it in it and was able to match up the wires andput it all back together again, and by God it worked! And I can remember in high school I used to sit in—well, I was heavilyinfluenced by the San Francisco World’s Fair in 1939-1940 because the SantaFe Railroad had an absolutely magnificent display of model trains goingaround and around in one of these—it was much nicer than the SouthernPacific display, but the SP display was all right too—but the Santa Fe displaywas huge. And in these day, I was now—what, thirteen years old or so, and inthose days you could—I could walk down to the street car, take the street cardown to the Ferry Building as a thirteen-year old and get on the ferry boat. Mymother would say, “Just be back by six.” And I’d go over and spend the wholeday at the World’s Fair all by myself. There was no concern about safety ofyoung people or anything like that. I would spend most of my day alongside the Santa Fe exhibit watching thesetrains go by. It was a panorama of the western scenery that you might run intoin New Mexico and stuff. These trains went around and around and around,and I watched the little three-color light signals change from green to red andthen back to yellow and then back to green, and then the next train wouldcome by and it would go to red. Once I got into high school I spent a lot of my time in study hall sitting therewith a pencil designing new signaling circuits for electric trains. So I alwayshad this sort of—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I can see that. Let me ask you—with your father dead at a young age—whathappened to your mother in terms of supporting the family? Dennis: Well, my grandfather took very good care of us, and she owned a building indowntown San Francisco called the Physicians Building on Sutter Street thatgave her some income and it was primarily—I think the family was veryfortunate to have the financial resources to get through the Depression withoutany serious problems. I had an older brother and an older sister, so there werethree of us in the family. My mother never remarried, but really it was, I’dsay, the automobile business and my grandfather’s work at that that supportedus through the Depression. One of my favorite keepsakes or mementos is a pocket watch that I have witha very nice chain that I only get to wear when I’m all dressed up in black-tie or something. Just before my grandfather died, when I was over at hisapartment and he called me and he was in bed, he called me in and he wasperfectly lucid, but he said, “Reid—I’ve got two watches here, and I’m goingto give you your choice of them, and I’ll give the other one to your cousin.And one of these,” he said, “this one came from the Studebaker Companyafter twenty-five years of service.” And he says, “It’s probably the betterwatch. But the other one came to me from the motorcar dealer’s associationand it’s inscribed in the back ‘in 1922, upon his completion of ten years ofactive service as an officer of the association.’” He said, “This one was givento me by my competitors and it’s always meant a great deal to me.” So I havehung onto that watch. [with emotion] So obviously, as you can tell, I was very close to him, and as we say, we did,in those days we did, generally, what our parents and grandparents told us todo most of the time.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You said you have an older brother and sister. Had your grandfather more orless picked you out as the one to try to inspire? Dennis: Right. Well, my older brother was a little bit more of a loose cannon and hedid go to Stanford. I think he may be the only person in history that’s beenkicked out of Stanford three times in a row! [chuckling] He either bowled hisway out twice and skied his way out once or else he skied his way out twiceand bowled his way out once. He loved the sports and stuff, but he was not avery good student, but he was a very charming guy. My sister did go toStanford and completed the four years and was happily married right at theend of the war and happily married for a long, long time. But they are all gonenow. I think that my grandfather took a special interest in me—number one becauseI was there at what he considered to be an impressionable age. And I lovedthose pancakes, so I’d get over there frequently. It freed up my mother to dowhatever she wanted to on Saturday night and Sunday and stuff, so she likedthe idea. She spent a lot of time working for things like the infant shelter inSan Francisco and other good works like that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Where did you live in San Francisco? Dennis: Well, we lived on Locust Street in San Francisco and just very near LaurelVillage, but over the hill so I could look out over the San Francisco Presidioand see the Bay and Alcatraz, and I could watch the ships come and go in andout of the Golden Gate. We had a house that was four stories and myplayroom was on the fourth floor, so I had this big, huge window looking out the room—it was a very large room and it was filled with electric trains, butone end had this big window. But my grandfather would call me and sometimes on the weekends thedirigible [USS] Macon, which was stationed down here at Moffett Fieldwould be floating over the city, and so he’d come over and grab a hold of meand we’d get in the car and we’d go chase the Macon around from hilltop tohilltop, watching this wonderful, wonderful dirigible fly over the city. And then his friend—Moore, I can’t remember—Moore Dry DockCompany—I’ll think of it—I’ll call you at about midnight tonight and tell youhis first name! But at any rate, a friend ran the Moore Dry Dock Company andhe’d call him when they were building the Bay Bridge and he’d say, “Chester,we’re going to be lifting sections up off the barges this afternoon,” at such andsuch a time. They pre-fabbed a lot of these big sections of the Bay Bridge atMoore Dry Dock over in Alameda and Oakland and then would float them outthere at slack tide or ebb tide, whenever it was when the tide wasn’t movingvery much, they’d send cables down and hoist these things up in to positionon the Bay Bride. Well, we would—my grandfather would grab me and we’d go down and we’dgo up to the top of that hill by the bridge where the big apartment house nowput up a big tower; for a long, long time it was there, just an advertising tower.Well, we’d go sit up on top of that hill and watch this process. So he just—sometimes we’d come down the peninsula to see how much waterwas coming into the Spring Valley lakes because they’d just opened theaqueduct from Hetch Hetchy, and I think we were there for the openingceremony at the Pulgas Water Temple. He just was interested in those sorts ofthings, and so he would get me involved in it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was it a given, with two siblings, that you would go to Stanford? Dennis: Almost—it really was, in that my mother’s two closest friends were Don[Donald B.] and Mary Tresidder, and Don Tresidder was president ofStanford. Mary Tresidder was Mary Curry of the Yosemite Park and CurryCompany and Don Tresidder was president of the Yosemite Park and CurryCompany. During the war, 1942 and ’43, the summers of ’42 and ’43, all of the eighteenyear olds were off to war and it was the first time Yosemite Park and CurryCompany had allowed sixteen year olds to work during the summer. Theyneeded summer help up there, obviously. And so, in effect, I got my first jobfrom Don Tresidder, and I worked at the stables during the summer. I workedon the burro picnic. It was a wonderful division of labor—there was a young woman there that—her job was to take of the kids on the burro picnic and myjob was to take care of the burros on the burro picnic. And so that’s the waywe worked, but rode a horse and took them down the valley to this picnicand ’43. And then in May of ’44, I became eighteen and the navy—this carries on partof the training—the navy—I wanted to volunteer for the navy and you had tovolunteer before you were eighteen, or else once you turned eighteen youwere subject to the draft. But if you were going to volunteer for one of theother services, you had to do it before you turned eighteen. The navy had atest called the Eddy Test. They badly needed radio technicians and radartechnicians, although we didn’t really even know about the existence of radarin those days, but they called us radio techs. You could take this test beforeyou turned eighteen, and if you passed it, the navy would say, “Young man, ifyou volunteer for the navy, we will, number one, we’ll let you finish highschool, so you can go back and graduate,” which was only about three or fourweeks in my case. But “Number two, we will guarantee you that if you comeinto the navy you will go into radio technician training.” And we went in withthe rank of, I think, first class seaman, which was a step up. Anyway, I passedthat test and so I went—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What was it? Physics and mathematics? That sort of thing? Dennis: Yeah, physics, mathematics, and particular spatial relations. I rate very, veryhigh in spatial relations. If you give me a whole train of gears and you tell meyou’re going to turn this one one way, I can tell you which way this one isgoing to go. I can figure it out. I’m not clairvoyant, but—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you think that’s from your railroad {unclear}— Dennis: It’s from interest in mechanical things. It’s interest in mechanical things, and Ihave a very good friend in the venture business who said, “Reid, you reallyshould have been a mechanical engineer, not an electrical engineer.” Well, Idon’t know about that, but I love, not mechanical things—I love innovation!You know, and I love—it’s absolutely fascinating to study the whole field ofinnovation. In some of my talks when I talk to young people I say, “Numberone, you should realize that innovation is nothing new.” And I wait for that tosink in for a while, because of course innovation is something new! It is and itisn’t, but there’s a wonderful double entendre there—but I’ve often claimedthat innovation goes back a long, long way. I think that Adam was the firstinnovator, when he picked up the fig leaf. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Maybe Eve handed it to him. Dennis: Well, I don’t know—I wasn’t there. [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Just a thought. Dennis: But at any rate—could be, but nevertheless, it became Adam’s innovation, Ithink. And it’s wonderful to go back and study the innovations of George andRobert Stephenson in England, as steam came along. It’s absolutely amazingto me that with the first steam engines that were developed in England, theyused to heat up the boiler and get the steam to get the piston moving in onedirection and then they would spray cold water in there in order to get it tomove in the opposite direction. Well, if you can think of a more inefficientthermal situation than that, I can’t imagine what it is. And then Stephensoncame up with this idea of putting a valve on the outside that would allow youto introduce some new steam on the other side of the piston. So there are allsorts of innovations and it really is sort of fun to try to explore these thingsand figure out is there a newer and better—is there a different and better wayof doing it? So it’s—no matter what it is.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I would think that your grandfather had something to do with this, by takingyou places where new things were happening. Dennis: Well, he—he did. He took me to Detroit. He became a Ford dealer in 1935,and 1939 or 1940 on our way to the New York World’s Fair we went toDetroit. He was a very—at one stage of the game he was the largest Forddealer, prior to the war, he was the largest Ford dealer on the Pacific Coast. Sohe was well received at the factory and [brief interruption]. Okay—anyway,where was I—what was the last thing I said?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, you were talking about innovation and then your grandfather, the large— Dennis: Oh yeah, and when we traveled—yeah—we went back with him to Dearbornand visited the Ford factory. They gave us an escort and a car and, God—wewent all over the River Rouge Plant, including the steel mill and everythingelse—you know, you go down into the steel mill and see these huge hotingots. It’s things you couldn’t do today—there’s just no way you can do themtoday. But he loved that sort of thing and he had a couple of good friends back therethat were—Carl Breer and Fred Zeder, who were two partners with WalterChrysler, and the three of them had started the Chrysler Motor Company. Chrysler was dead and gone, and I don’t think that my grandfather was ever aclose friend of Walter Chrysler, but he was close friends with the Zeders andthe Breers, and they had these absolutely magnificent houses out at GrossePointe with huge lawns that went down to the Detroit River and a dock and aboat sitting there. It was a pretty heady life and I know—I can still rememberthat after that visit there, my grandfather said, “Well, Reid I have some friendswho’ve made a lot more money than I have made in my life, but they have tolive in Detroit.” [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And that’s all right with me. Dennis: And that’s okay with me—and they lived quite well out here. But at any rate, Don Tresidder having given me my first job when I—I think itwas Don Tresidder’s recommendation that I go to the Thacher School down inthe Ojai Valley when they were looking for a prep school. Don took me downand delivered me there, as a matter of fact, because the Tresidders flew asmall airplane in the thirties, they had a Waco [Aircraft Corporation], a cabinclass Waco. My mother was scared to death of flying, but any time theTresidders asked me to fly with them, she’d let me go. And so I loved flyingand sitting in the back seat of that airplane. So I went to Thacher; I was there for four years. There were only seventy-fivekids in the school when I was there, so it was a small school. But I think thatgot me on my feet and focused me on studying in a way that I probablywouldn’t have if I’d gone to a larger public high school. There were no girlsthere, which meant there were fewer distractions at that time. We’d havedances occasionally, where they’d import the girls, but nevertheless, Thachertaught me how to study, how to meet deadlines—a paper is due when it’s due,and things like that. I did very well in the math and the physics and thechemistry courses. Those were my strong suits. French was my weak suit. I did all right in Latin, and it’s interesting that at the time I can rememberthinking, My God, this is a waste of time. Why are we studying Latin? Andyet today—there are still times when you think about sentence structure andthings like that, and it is such a structured language. In terms of businessthings—I know when I worked for American Express I had one fund managerworking for me who was a very good investor and a very good manager of thefund, but he’d write a report to be presented to the executive committee andit’d be three pages long, and I’d go through and I’d strike out unnecessarywords and redundancies and stuff, and I could boil it down to about less than apage and it’d still mean the same thing.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you learned how to write.  Dennis: So I learned something about how to write and how to express yourself in theEnglish language, although I may not be doing as great a job today assometimes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: No, you’re fine. Well, tell me about Stanford. You majored in engineering? Dennis: Well, I applied for Stanford—I graduated from Thacher in ’44 so I applied toStanford to be admitted in the fall of ’44, you know, because you didn’t knowwhen the war was going to end, but of course, I went in the navy for two yearsinstead. But nevertheless—and Don Tresidder said, “I want to write one ofyour letters of recommendation.” He was then president of Stanford and—[chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It probably helped! Dennis: I said, Gee, I’m not at all—I didn’t say this, but I think maybe my mother wasnot at all sure that was appropriate, and she said—and Tresidder’s attitudewas, “Well, I gave him his first job!” [laughter] And it was very, veryimportant in those summer jobs that you stay through Labor Day—that younot quit a week or two early and leave them in the lurch. And I stayed until thelast dying gasps, so to speak, before I had to go back to school. And I wasconscientious about what I was doing up there, so—anyway, he wrote a letterof recommendation and I was accepted at Stanford. Of course Stanford waswhen I came back from the navy, Stanford honored that acceptance, so it wasjust sort of a natural thing for me to do now.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And then was there a flood of applicants because of the G.I. Bill? Dennis: Oh sure. It started up—but it wasn’t an uncontrollable flood. But you know, Ithink that it’d be interesting to take a look at college enrollments after WorldWar II, because I think that from a philosophical point of view, when youthink about government policy and education policy, and you think aboutinvestments, I don’t think this nation has ever made a better investment thanthe one they made with the G.I. Bill. After World War II, we educated allsorts of kids at the college level, all sorts of kids from—particularly from theMidwest who never in their wildest dreams thought they were going to evergo to college. But a lot of them passed through California on their way to thePacific and they never went back to the Midwest, except to visit. [chuckling]But you mean, Gee, you don’t have to shovel snow out here? It’s pretty good!It’s not bad.  But I think that was a tremendous boost to the United States in terms of oureconomic development because of the way we educated kids. And we’re facedwith a major problem today in terms of how do we solve that problem. I hopewe do it with enough imagination and courage that we do something similar.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, Obama has made a lot out of doing something about improvingeducation so everybody has a chance. Dennis: Well, you know—and he stands, in my mind, he stands as the mostoutstanding example of the fact that we should educate our kids to themaximum of their ability rather than to the maximum of their financial ability.To the maximum of their intellectual ability rather than to the maximum oftheir financial ability. I think that’s the way we ought to educate kids. If theycan get into—I’ll have to say, UC Berkeley or Stanford or Princeton or Yaleor Harvard—if they can meet the entrance requirements and have theintellectual capacity to do well at those schools, we ought to get them in thereand we’ll get the best return on our investment.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I agree. Dennis: It’s—being very calloused—it will be a return on investment.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All right. So Stanford—and your grandfather had pointed you towardsengineering. Dennis: Absolutely, yeah—and my interest in electric trains pointed me towards—andthen my radio technician training pointed me towards electrical engineering. Now at Stanford I took a course in wave theory once, I can remember,because that’s fairly important in electrical work. I and I can remember I gotabsolutely lost as to which way the waves were going, so if you can’t figureout which way the waves are going, you probably don’t have the kind ofabilities to be a really creative engineer. So that’s what sort of led me in—Iknew I wasn’t going to be a creative engineer—so that’s what sort of led meto the business school after engineering. My whole plan was I was going tolearn something about the field of finance, and then I was going to go to workfor an electronics company down on the peninsula here and act as the liaisonbetween the financial world and the technical world.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And was that a new way of thinking? Were there people doing that kind ofthing?  Dennis: Not really, because after I got out of business school I went to work in SanFrancisco for the Fireman’s Fund Insurance Company. When I interviewedthe man that was in charge of the investment department up there, he said,“Reid, we think there’s a lot that’s going to happen in fields related toengineering, and we think it’d be easier to take somebody who knowssomething about engineering and teach him something about investments thanit would be to take a typical liberal arts major and teach him how tounderstand engineering.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. Dennis: And it was interesting at the time—this is 1952 that I got out of school, and Iwent to work for Fireman’s Fund in the fall of ’52. If you were a liberal artsmajor from a good business school, the starting salary was $325 a month. Ifyou were an engineering student with a business school degree and you wentto work for one of the companies here on the peninsula, or elsewhere, thestarting salary would be $425 a month. That’s a big spread. He said, “We’rewilling to pay you a starting engineer’s wage to come and work for us atFireman’s Fund.” So for a hundred bucks a month, that extra hundred bucks amonth they got me! I can still remember the interview—he said, “If we give you this job, do youthink you will still be here three years from now?” Boy that sounded like along time. That sounded like half of the rest of my life, and I wasn’t at all surethat it was going to take me three years to learn about investments and then goget a good job somewhere else. But I sort of bit my tongue and said, “Ohyeah, I’m sure, yes sir, I’ll be here for three years.” Well, I ended up stayingtwenty-one years and Fireman’s Fund became part of American Express. But the fellow I worked for named Fred [H.] Merrill, who was—Fred was oneof these wonderful guys who would leave piles of responsibility lying aroundon the floor of his office, and if you wanted to go in and pick up one of thosepiles of responsibility and go run with it, he couldn’t be more pleased. “Be myguest. Take it and do what you can.” And the thing that really propelled meinto the venture business happened—well, it really sort of came to a climaxabout a month or so before I went to work for Fireman’s Fund.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But step back a minute, though—what were you hired to do at Fireman’sFund? Dennis: I was hired to become a security analyst trainee. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. And so that’s why he wanted this, at least a three-year commitment. Hedidn’t want to train you and have you disappear. Dennis: Sure, but security analysis in those days was quite different than what it laterbecame. But nevertheless, he just wanted, whatever training I got, it wasprimarily field trips. At that time I would say more than almost anything elseit was—we made an awful lot of investment decisions based on our appraisalsof the management of these companies and whether we thought they weredoing a good job as well as, of course, the markets for their products. Youwanted to have good sales and so forth. But it wasn’t a really very formaltraining program. It was more or less on-the-job training—you know, youknow, you’re going to go make some mistakes and you’re going to do somethings right and we hope there’ll be more of the latter than the former.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was this what we would now call today the venture capital branch ofFireman’s Fund? Dennis: No, no.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What was this unit? Dennis: No—this was just strictly investing in industrial stocks. This was—do youhang on to your Westinghouse? Or do you invest in both GE andWestinghouse and Dupont, and going to security analyst meetings andlistening to management programs and stuff. But he said, “You know, ifyou—we’re not going to invest in these little dinky companies.” Let me back up for a minute—and get this point across again—because justbefore I joined Fireman’s Fund, I had seen when I was at Stanford inengineering, I’d seen an Ampex tape recorder in an engineering seminar. Itwas a very early, very crude tape recorder. And I said, “You know—I think—I don’t know anything about tape recording but I think that technology isgoing to be useful for a lot more things than just recording Bing Crosby’svoice.” And that’s what got Ampex started, was Bing Crosby wanted to playgolf on Sunday afternoon rather than having to go on the radio, and he had avery popular Sunday afternoon radio program. Well, none of the recording systems up to that time had enough fidelity toallow him to go play golf on Sunday afternoon. He had to be there in person,so the magnetic tape recording came along and Crosby Enterprises gaveAmpex, I think, the order for their first ten machines, just so Bing could playgolf. They never became investors in the company, but they did give them theorder that got them going. And I said, “I think it’s going to be used for more things than that.” I didn’t know what all they were going to be used for, butthere were some hints that it would be used for some other things. Well, as I had a chance—about a month before, and that happened while I wasin engineering, but about a month before I went to work for Fireman’s Fund, Iran into a friend of my brother’s in one of the offices on Montgomery Street,and he knew I had been interested in Ampex and he said, “Reid, we’re doing alittle financing for Ampex.” He and his family were heavily involved withAmpex as a private company. And he said, “We’re doing a little financing andmaybe you’d be—.” Well, actually, he thought the man I worked for at thetime might be interested in putting some money into it, and as a result of thatconversation, I ended up putting the amount that I could afford at the time—itturned out to be $13,000, and I said, “Oh, I recognize that number—$13,000.That was an opportunity missed once before and I’m not going to let it happenthis time.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How had you acquired $13,000? Dennis: It was left over from my college education. My grandparents had helped meget through college and had given me a little bit of a trust fund, and I had—there was $13,000 in there that I could sell some Southern California Edisonpreferred stock. I didn’t control the trust fund, my mother was trustee, but shetalked to her investment counselor and they knew some of the people thatwere involved with Ampex and they said, “Oh that’s a good company, now ifhe’s going to—.” At any rate, so I ended up—this financing had a minimum of $25,000 units,but you could split a unit. So I looked at it for my boss and he said, “Reid, Idon’t care whether I take half a unit or if you want fifteen or whatever, I’ll—.”He was very gracious and I said, “Well, I think in ninety days I can come upwith another $2,000, so I’d like to take 15 out of this $25,000 unit. Well, that$15,000, in a period of about three-and-a-half years turned into somethingbetween $800,000 and $900,000. And I just took the whole pile of everythingI had and pushed it out on the table.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How old were you at this point? Dennis: Oh, let’s see—in 1952 I had to be twenty-six.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You were doing all right. Dennis: But I had—twenty-six—by that time I guess I had three kids or four kids. Ican’t remember which! I got married in the second quarter of my sophomore year. And we had two kids before I graduated—well, that would be ’52, so—yeah, ’52 and two kids. But at any rate—but that really was my first, whatwould now qualify as a venture capital investment. [interruption to commenton room logistics]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But you told me off tape today that there was not that term. Dennis: No, no, no—I’m just saying that—no, it was just an investment in a privatelyheld company, but it was—no that term did not apply in those days, butnevertheless, in today’s lingo that would qualify as my first venture capitalinvestment.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. Dennis: And it sort of said, “God, this is better than working!” But I still didn’t want toleave Fireman’s Fund. I was having too much fun, you know. And my bosssaid you know, frankly, he knew I was interested in looking at these smallhigh-tech companies and he said, “If you go on a business trip and you wantto go visit the xyz company or the abc company, that’s all right. Be our guest.You can do that. If you visit some of these small companies while you’retraveling, you will learn things that will probably affect our investment inGeneral Electric or Westinghouse, or one of the bigger companies—RCA,”something like that. It was interesting—there was a lot of common wisdom that said RCA ought tocontrol the magnetic tape-recording business. They never did, you know,Ampex controlled that. And you know, just wait until RCA catches up tothem. Well, they never caught up to them. But my objective was still, forsome time I was thinking that I’d eventually go back to work on the peninsula,but Fireman’s Fund was very good to me. What we did was—and I went to work there in 1952—it was 1960 before Ifinally got—eight years later—that I finally got Fireman’s Fund to make itsfirst, what you would now call, a venture capital investment, and in a privatelyheld venture deal. In those days it was called special situations, and I thinkthat we had, at Fireman’s Fund we had six members of the board of directors[who] were on the investment committee. None of them had an investmentbackground. They were all heads of big corporations and the only one thatreally understood investments was A. Crawford Greene, who was a lawyer inSan Francisco who was very close to one of the big banks in New York and hewould opine that this particular bank thought well of something or didn’t thinkwell of something. And that carried a lot of weight.  I can remember one of the officers was—I think he was a senior vice presidentof the Bank of America, a big guy—I can’t remember his name right now{add name? }. He had a fist like a ham hock and he’dcome down on the table, “Well, at the bank we’re doing this,” or that orsomething else. Well, by talking to the analysts at the lower levels in the bank,we would know damn well that the bank wasn’t doing that at all! Butnevertheless, the investment committee was a gentleman’s club, and if theyhadn’t heard of—if you presented something to them and they had neverheard the name before—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You mean a company? Dennis: A company, a company name, and they had never heard the name of thiscompany before, it by definition became what was called “a special situation.”And special situations were things that nobody knew anything about exceptmaybe some of us at the lower level. And that is what eventually becameknown as venture capital.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Meaning special being kind of exceptional situations. Dennis: Exceptional, yeah—exception to the standard practice, because here was thisfancy investment committee and none of them knew anything about it otherthan what they got from the junior analysts who were sitting around the table.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And was there also the connotation that this was risky? Dennis: Oh yeah. There was—it was risky but it’s—the first such investment theFireman’s Fund made was in a company called Recognition Equipment, downin Dallas, Texas. Recognition Equipment was developing a new opticalcharacter reader, and they were developing something that was called a pagereader. My boss, Fred Merrill, said, “This new device has some realapplication in the insurance business. It could read claims forms.” And I got all steamed up—well, I heard about this company from somebodyin New York, a broker, who said, “Look, Reid, I would like to meet with youafter hours because I don’t want to take your time during the day. This doesn’treally apply to Fireman’s Fund, but I’d like to talk to you about how wefinance this company,” because we’d done a number of other financings in thefifties, in the late fifties. I’ll get back to that, but he told me what it was andgave me this big report. I brought it back here; it was Thanksgiving Dayweekend.  I took it down to the fellow who was in charge of our data-processing atFireman’s Fund, and he took it home and read it, digested this thing over theThanksgiving weekend, and came in Monday morning and he said, “Reid, ifthese guys have half of what they claim they have, this is better than slicedbread.” I recognized that sliced bread was pretty good. So with that, the two ofus went together and Fred Merrill told the investment committee, “We aregoing to give this company an order for the first machine that they willproduce. And that is going to have such a dramatic impact on the financialcondition of this company that we ought to take advantage of it by investing init at the same time.” And that’s what carried the day.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And did Fred Merrill have the pull where these concerned the boardmembers? Dennis: Oh yes, oh yes, sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So what he said went? Dennis: Absolutely, yeah.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because would they have resisted without— Dennis: No, no, no, no. They understood the argument and we were only talking aboutinvesting, I think, $650,000 was a modest amount, or $600,000, somethinglike that. But we were going to be giving them an order for this big machine,so we might as well put some more money out in the form of investment andwe got behind it. Well, that—we later—[technical interruption to switchtapes][End Audio File 1] Dennis: Recognition Equipment, in 1960, became the first special situation thatFireman’s Fund got involved in.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now are you painting the board of directors as not necessarily averse toinvestment in innovative ideas, but more just untutored? Not knowing enoughto decide one way or the other?  Dennis: Yeah, I think this board of directors operated in a certain circle, and it wasvery much of a club and they knew other members of the club. Then heresuddenly we were recommending companies that they didn’t know anythingabout. So they were not opposed to the idea—they were perfectly willing totake a chance and they did. It was interesting a couple of years later;Recognition Equipment went public and the stock went up to the point wherewe had doubled our money.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So they couldn’t deny that! Dennis: Well, no, but they suggested at a meeting—I used to go to these meetings.There was a suggestion at one meeting that, “Well, Mr. Dennis, you’vedoubled your money in this investment, don’t you think you should sell half ofit and get our money back?” And I said, “Well, sir, I think it still has more togo.” Well, it tripled and—“Shouldn’t you sell a third of it and get our moneyback?” “Well, it still has more to go.” We played this game for a couple of years until the point—and we weresupposed to get prior approval from the committee before we sold anything,but one day I came into the office and the price of Recognition stock had goneup to the point where we’d made ten times our money. And I said, “I’m goingto sell 10 percent of it and get our money back,” [chuckling] which I did! Andthen I just—without authorization, I sold the 10 percent, got the money back,and then at the next meeting of the committee I reported that I had movedahead and had gotten our money back out of Recognition Equipment. Well, that stock went on to become the largest tangible asset the Fireman’sFund had. At the height of the market we owned over $40 million worth of thestock, with a cost basis of a little over a million dollars. By the time we werethrough, we took out about $15 million in profits, which was pretty good.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Pretty impressive. Were you making decisions all along? You were watchingwhat was happening to the stock—was it mainly on the basis of share price?Or were you looking at the company in greater depth than that? Dennis: Well, it was interesting, because I actually went on the board. The investmentbecame so important to Fireman’s Fund that I actually went on the board ofdirectors of Recognition Equipment, so I was very well informed as to whatwas going on.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And when that happens—how did that work? Did Fireman’s Fund say,“We’ve got x dollars of investment in you—you’d better take this young guyand put him on your board?” Was that the way it went?  Dennis: Oh no. No, no, no. I was close enough to the company that they wanted me togo on the board.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Okay, all right. So it was not pressure from them. Dennis: No, no pressure at all, no. No—and I wasn’t that young anymore. Remember,this is 1960. I was in my thirties. [laughter] Yeah, I was an old man!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Old man. Dennis: An old man in the latter half of my thirties. So it’s—something like that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So that was your first board membership, presumably. Dennis: Yes, it was.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you know what to do as a director? Dennis: Oh I think so, yeah, I think so. It was a great learning experience and I was onthat board for nineteen years. I went on the board early on before the thingbecame a successful investment. They wanted my input.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So they presumably were relying on you for investment—or were they morefor management of the company? Dennis: No, it’s a wavy line between those two. It’s a fairly porous border. I think thatit’s one of the reasons why I think it’s important for young people who wantto go into the venture business to not be in a hurry. I think the venturebusiness is a better business to enter after you’ve been doing something elsefor ten years, working at what I call an honest job somewhere else andlearning something about management of an enterprise, and learning aspecialty, whether it be marketing or finance or something else—ormanufacturing. But at any rate that’s—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, did you indeed find that your years of membership on that board didhave great application for what you were going to do later? 20 Dennis: Oh gosh, yes. [chuckling] It certainly did, because at one stage of the game,we had to look for a new chief executive officer for Recognition Equipmentand we formed a three-man executive committee. We didn’t have a candidateto become the new CEO, but we knew we had to get rid of the old CEO, so inthe interim period, the founding CEO of Recognition Equipment was one ofthese guys who would, two months before the end of the fiscal year, thecompany would be in terrible trouble and then through heroic efforts on hispart in the last two months of the year, he’d go pull out the whole fiscal yearand everybody would be giving him a pat on the back. Well, there’s no reasonin the world why it had to get into all that trouble anyway, in the first place. Recognition Equipment was a company that was more interested in trying tosolve virtually impossible engineering problems than it was in making money.So we had to get rid of this guy and go on an executive search for a new CEO,and by this time I was—they had made me chairman of the board at REI, andTrammell Crow, the real estate developer, lived, lives—still lives in Dallas,but he [telephone ringing] was on the board. [Trammell Crow died January14, 2009.] So it was a great learning experience; it was a fabulous learning experience.Serving for nineteen years, serving on a board of directors, you’d better learnsomething. But I ended up as I say, chairman of the board, and then when wedecided we had to make a change in the CEO, we decided to form anexecutive committee as an interim committee to run the company and keep theCEO from going wild while we were looking for a new CEO. At any rate—so we formed a three-man executive committee to run thecompany. It was—the CEO, Trammell Crow, who was in the real estatebusiness, and myself. And I was made chairman of the executive committee.So I was chairman of the board and chairman of the executive committee. Andafter the meeting broke up and we walked out into the hall, Trammell put hisarm around me and said, “Reid, I don’t have time to fuss with this. You’ve gottwo votes on this committee.” [chuckling] So I was back and forth to Dallastwice a month for quite a long period of time until we found a new CEO whowas good for a while and really pulled the company out and got it going, got itgoing up and up and up, but it went right over the top and back down again, soit was—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What do you mean by that? Because of his mismanagement? Dennis: He was more interested in growing sales than he was in building a profitablecompany.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see, I see. And were you trying to advise him otherwise?  Dennis: Well, this was a pretty strong character. It was pretty hard to do, but at anyrate—that’s sort of a diversion, but I do think it taught me a lot about—I don’twant to get into the personalities on that, but I think it taught me a lot about—I learned a lot about being a board member in that particular experience. Ithink the other thing that you should know is that having gotten Fireman’sFund into the venture business, and having gotten them into the venturebusiness on a successful basis, REI was—you know, this is probably one ofthe cardinal rules that anybody thinking about venture investing or specialsituation investing should always follow and that is to always make your firstsuch investment a very successful one. If you can do that, then—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And are you going to tell us how to do that? [laughter] Dennis: Well, I don’t know how to do it—it was—you’ve got to be lucky, butobviously my first investment in Ampex was a very successful one. TheFireman’s Fund’s first investment in Recognition Equipment was a verysuccessful one.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did anything surprise you? Dennis: Not really. No, not really.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You expected it? Dennis: Look—there was a lot of opportunity at the time and there were not a lot ofpeople in this business. There was not a lot of competition in this business.There was not a lot of competition in terms of people funding small littleprivately held companies. And my arrangement with Fred Merrill was prettyinteresting because he knew that I liked to invest in these little dinky things,but he said, “Reid,”—at that time I had gotten to the point where I couldinvest maybe $25,000, maybe even $50,000 at a crack at that time because ofmy success with Ampex, and he said, “we’re not going to look at investmentsthat small. So anything that’s $50,000 or less, you can feel free to invest in.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Meaning you personally, Reid Dennis. Dennis: Meaning me, Reid Dennis, personally. “And anything that’s $250,000 or moreas an opportunity, we, Fireman’s Fund, want to have a look at it.” So we gotsort of a $200,000 no man’s land in between here, which is the way weavoided the conflict of interest. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That was smart. Dennis: Yeah, and it worked very, very well. And I made, personally, I made a lotmore money than Fred Merrill did in my personal investments, and yet he hadan investment background. And some senior officers would be very jealous ofthat sort of thing and resentful of this—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Young punk. Dennis: Young punk out here in the investment department who’s doing so well, andyet he took a great deal of pleasure in it and said, “You know, I’d rather havea successful investor running my investment department—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] I would think! Dennis: —than an unsuccessful investor. And that’s what I heard from visitors whohad come to visit him and then he’d send them in to see me.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So I imagine your reputation as an astute investor was spreading, or was itmaybe still {unclear}. Dennis: No, it was pretty good. It was pretty good because we have to, somewherealong the line here we have to back up and talk about what happened in thefifties and sixties on the personal side, because—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All right. Well, let’s do that now. Dennis: Because at that time, from roughly 1955 to 1965, there was a group of us inSan Francisco, and we called ourselves The Group, as a matter of fact, for thelack of a better name. It consisted of Bill Bowes, who was then at Blyth &Company, and John Bryan was at Blyth & Company. Bill Bowes later wenton to form U.S. Venture Partners. John Bryan became a partner with BillEdwards in a company called Bryan and Edwards, but Bryan and Edwardswas primarily investing their own money and their own financial resources.Bill Bowes went out to U.S. Venture Partners and raised a lot of money fromthe outside.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now how did that group come together?  Dennis: Well, we just knew each other. We were all about the same age; we allworked in the financial district. I was the only one that had a EE background,and so I could understand what some of these—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: They had business and investment backgrounds? Dennis: Yeah, they had investment backgrounds; they were working for investmentcompanies, but we were about the same age.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see, but they didn’t have the science. Dennis: But they didn’t have the technical training. When I went to work forFireman’s Fund in ’52, I was really the only young person, the only youngperson in the financial community up there, just out of school, who did havean engineering background and an engineering degree. So I’d get calls frombrokers and other people along Montgomery Street there and [they’d] say,“Reid, we’ve had a visit from some guy. He’s got a black box and I can’t tellyou what this black box does, but he’s looking for financing. Would you mindtalking to him?” So I’d say, “No. I don’t mind talking to him.” So we ended up with a group of us—there were five in The Group: Dan[Daniel J.] McGanney at Lionel D. Edie was also part of it—that was aninvestment counsel firm. And we had some other people that participatedalongside of us. But we would get four or five members of this group together,and the group consisted of five members, and we’d get four of us or five of ustogether and we’d invite the entrepreneur to come have lunch at Jack’s orSam’s.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now did you, the group, invite the entrepreneurs? Dennis: Oh sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You were known and people were {unclear}. Dennis: Well, the broker would call us and say, “Would you talk to so and so.” Andthen one of us would talk to him and get a preliminary idea and then we’d say,“Well, we’ll call the group together. Can you join us for lunch on this or thator some other day?”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, do you want to just finish with The Group? And then we’ll take a break?  Dennis: Yeah, we’ll get interrupted here for a minute.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So there was a little bit of vetting, it sounds like—the person who was firstcontacted would look over this proposition, right? Dennis: Absolutely, yeah. [brief interruption] Okay. Anyhow—where was I—oh, wewould call The Group together, get the entrepreneur to come in and havelunch with us. Eventually one of our members got to become a member of theUniversity Club and sometimes we’d go up there and have a fancy lunch. Butwe liked Sam’s, which was—I think on Bush Street or Pine—Pine [it’s onBush Street], I think, because they had little booths, plywood booths and theplywood was about an eighth of an inch thick so you could hear everythinggoing on in the next booth, but nevertheless, we felt as though we had a littleprivacy. We’d call the entrepreneur in and we’d have lunch with him. He would tell ushis story and after lunch was over—and it was always a he—he didn’t getmuch to eat, but nevertheless, he’d get the story out. We’d excuse him andsay, “Go stand outside on the sidewalk for ten minutes and let us talk aboutthis and we’ll come out and tell you what our decision is.” And we’d talkaround the table—“Do you like it? Who has questions?” And so forth and soon. “Who’s going to be on his board?” We’d assign one of The Group to bethe leader and then we would go out and—both John Bryan and Bill Edwardshad some inherited wealth and they could invest, oh, $30,000 or $40,000 ifthey wanted to, but they could invest $25,000 or $30,000 quite easily. I wasabout a $10,000 or $15,000 investor at the time. But if we liked the deal, we’dgo out and we’d tell the ent[repreneur]. At that time—in the late fifties into the middle sixties—you could start acompany down here on the peninsula for anywhere from $250,000 to$350,000 dollars. And that’s what they needed as startup capital.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And that’s because everything’s lower—rent, salary, {unclear}. Dennis: Sure, sure, everything, yeah. Everything was lower—but that’s all you neededto get up to the point where you could get going and prove things would work.So we’d go out and we’d tell the entrepreneur, “Well, we like your deal.We’ve got $80,000 raised around the table from the five of us. Give us tendays and we’ll raise the rest of the money and we’re going to do your deal.”So all five of us would go back to our offices that afternoon and we’d callvarious hangers-on and camp-followers that worked in these brokerage firms. I can remember—we started what became the medical-electronics division ofSmith, Kline & French this way. [chuckling] Two entrepreneurs who really worked their hearts out, and we grew that thing on the Stanford campus to thepoint where Smith, Kline—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It was at Stanford! Dennis: That one was just in a rental building—not on the campus. It was over in theindustrial park, yeah, just in a rental building. Just in a warehouse. Well,actually when I first saw Corbin-Farnsworth they were in a little dinky shackjust off of Page Mill Road, but once the financing is done then they rented thewarehouse.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So is that fairly typical? That these entrepreneurs were pretty local? Dennis: Oh yeah, yeah.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And Silicon Valley types? Dennis: Most of it—Silicon Valley. Well, we did a couple of deals in San Diego orSouthern California. But the main thing is that it had to be relatively close by.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why was that? Because you wanted to be able to {unclear} them. Dennis: We wanted to be able to contact them easily, and we all had full-time jobsworking for somebody else.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see; you couldn’t be hopping on a plane. Dennis: You couldn’t be hopping on a plane to go see Joe Blow. We had full-time jobsdoing something else and so it had to be nights and weekends and things likethat that we got together with these guys.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How did these entrepreneurs react? Because you must have been just aboutthe only game in town. Dennis: They reacted very well.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: No but I mean from that—I didn’t phrase that question very well. I’m justimagining that at that time it was a fairly new phenomenon.  Dennis: It was a new phenomenon.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: For anybody to get hold of a group, have lunch, and say, “Okay, we can comeup with $800,000 and start your company! Dennis: Well, $800,000 we couldn’t do.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All right—then $80,000. Dennis: $250,000 to $300,000 of which we would put up $80,000 and eventually thatbecame $100,000 or a little more. But I can remember when we wereapproached by a fellow named Dave Bossen who’d come out from Ohio. Hehad worked for a company that made a paper thickness measuring machine.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh—Bill Draper talked about that. Dennis: Yeah, and the—Measurex.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right, Measurex. Dennis: Yes, Measurex. And Dave Bossen needed $1,200,000 to start his company.“Holy smokes, Dave! We’ve never seen money like that.” Well, he went backto New York and he got Pete Bancroft and his group at—what’s the name?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Bessemer. Dennis: At Bessemer Securities—and Bessemer Securities agreed to put up, I thinkeither $400,000 or $450,000, and there were a couple of other investors thatcame in, so he raised $600,000. Then he came back to see us and we said, “Ohwell, $600,000—we can do that!” But 1.2 million, there was no way we coulddo that, so we trailed along on Pete Bancroft’s coattails on that one. And hewas—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Had you known Pete Bancroft before this? Dennis: Well, I knew Bessemer Securities and that’s when I really got to know PeteBancroft fairly well. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You mentioned that part of this discussion around the table after theentrepreneur was standing on the curb was who would go on the board. Weredecisions like that made just by who happened to have the free time? Or werethere matching of backgrounds? Dennis: I can remember one day when I turned to Bill Edwards and said, “Bill—it’syour turn to go on the board.” Bill said, “I don’t know anything about beingon a board.” I said, “Well, join the club. Neither did any of the rest of us whenwe first started doing this, so you’re going to learn. But you’ve got to carryyour fair share.” So it was an assignment. We helped one another, but no—it was a great learning experience for all ofus. During that probably ten- or twelve-year period, from the middle-fifties tomiddle-sixties, we invested I think in maybe twenty-five little companiesdown the peninsula here. Of those twenty-five, I’d say eighteen of them werewildly successful; it was a very high percentage. And a couple of them we gotour money back. I think we only had big losses on maybe three.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Isn’t that an incredible record? Dennis: Yeah, yeah. It was—it was—the success ratio was very, very high. And weweren’t—later on, this business became one where you sort of expect the—[brief interruption]. Anyhow, later on people would say, “Well, all you need isone or two really good hits out of ten investments.” I don’t think so. I thinkthat the thing that really made the venture capital business highly successfulwas having a hit ratio of about 65 to 70 percent were successful investmentsand your real duds were only about 15 percent.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You mean from the standpoint of confidence? Dennis: In terms of financial return, just profitability.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, but I’m also—yes, I understand that. Dennis: It relates to confidence, yeah.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yeah, because if you have a percentage like that, people are going to say,“Well, these guys obviously know what they’re doing. Let’s go to them.” Dennis: Sure, yeah, absolutely. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But you’re implying that that isn’t true particularly? Dennis: I don’t think so.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You just need one or two really big ones. Dennis: Well, no, no. I don’t think it’s a question of need. I think it’s a question ofattitude towards the business. That’s what a lot of venture capitalists thinkthey need to do. I don’t think that is the way to really be successful in theventure capital business.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You need something else. Dennis: I think you need a bigger percentage of winners. You’re better off not makingthe investment than having a mediocre one.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see, yeah. Well maybe we can talk about this after the break. [interruption inrecording] I had just one more question, I think, about that subject and then Iwanted to go back to Fireman’s Fund and talk about the SBIC. Dennis: Okay. SBIC—the legislation about that?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yeah, and in fact, I thought that Fireman’s Fund actually had an SBIC. Dennis: No, we never did.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh you didn’t. That was misinformation then. Well, is it worth sayingsomething about—because I looked upon that as kind of an interim phase ofwhat became venture capital. Dennis: Well, it—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: We’re not on—anyway. Oh we are. Dennis: We’re on! Then we have to apologize for this recent diversion. [laughter]Well, we can talk about the SBIC movement and why we never had an SBIC. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, that’s what— Dennis: Because the SBIC legislation came along in order to get some governmentmoney into the hands of investors who would invest it in small companies.Small Business Investment Company is what an SBIC stands for—SmallBusiness Investment Company. It was, in effect, a government loan to thosecompanies, but along with it came a number of restrictions. And along with italso came a different kind of a tax consequence. It was, I think, harder togenerate capital gains through an SBIC. I can’t remember because we neverwent into the SBIC field because we had, within Fireman’s Fund andAmerican Express, we had plenty of capital ourselves, so we didn’t need thegovernment help on capital and we didn’t really want the government red tapethat went along with the regulations.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yeah, which apparently was considerable. Dennis: It was considerable. But for people who did not have sufficient capital, andwanted to put up some capital and then leverage it with government money ontop of that, the SBIC form worked out very well. However, there were twovery separate branches of what became the venture business.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. Dennis: And I have no exposure, really at all, to SBICs.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you know when the SBIC became the less-favored way, when it began todie out, why that might have been? Dennis: I think it was to the end of the sixties, but I think that it was again because ofthe regulation and the fact that—more than anything else.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And probably also {unclear} that there was a better way of doing it. Dennis: Well, that’s true—but I think—at least there certainly was a different way ofdoing it that was less burdensome. But I think that you really need to talk tosomebody who had had one.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Had had one. 30 Dennis: Or more familiar with it and why did they get out of it and so forth. Forinstance, one of the things that’s interesting—and we’ll have to get into thislater—when we started our independent venture funds after—it was 1973-74—we avoided pension funds. In the huge bull market of venture capital andfundraising, pension funds have become a major source of capital, and it’s oneof the things that has flooded the industry with so much capital that it doesn’tknow what to do with it. But we avoided pension funds because of the socalled Prudent Man Rule that the pension funds were bound by. If you hadmore than 25 percent of your capital came from pension funds, then the wholefund was subject to the—I think it was 25 percent; I believe that’s right—thewhole fund became subject to those Prudent Man regulations. Well, the Prudent Man Rule on one side and venture capital on the other arereally two diametrically opposed propositions to invest in a company thatdoesn’t exist in the present time and bet on managers who you can’t see themactually doing their management job in that environment. But you expect thatthey can do it or else you wouldn’t invest in them. But nevertheless, it’shard—is it prudent to—I suppose you could say, “Look, the returns in venturecapital have been so good that it’s imprudent not to at least have a part of yourfund in that area.” [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And the whole—putting it very simplistically—was the burden of the PrudentMan Rules to reduce the risk of investment? Dennis: Oh it was a way of—for instance—it was a way of sheltering a financecommittee or a board of directors from liability. You didn’t ever wantanybody to come back and say, you know, take you to court because youmade some stupid decision, some stupid investment decision. I think that inour current situation, you can say that Bernie [Bernard L.] Madoff did notreally follow the Prudent Man Rule. He was at the opposite end of thatspectrum. Now—was it prudent for his investors to invest in it? Was itprudent for investment counselors to recommend that their clients invest withMadoff? Probably not, because as some people have said, the constant returnof 8 percent should have been a red flag that nobody can—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Keep doing that. Dennis: Keep doing that, year after year after year after year. But we’ll have to let thecourts decide that. But that did affect it, and in effect, you see, when we started our first venturecapital fund in ’73 and ’74, we ended up with—with seven investors, six ofthem were insurance companies. Six of them were insurance companies just like Fireman’s Fund was, you know, and because I had worked for aninsurance company and knew what their filing requirements were and whatthey had to do in January with respect to filing their investments—in ourmeetings I could talk like I was one of them, and they thought I was a memberof the family. I think that helped us a great deal in our fundraising, because Iunderstood their problems. And so we ended up with six insurance companiesplus the Ford Foundation. Those were our first seven investors in 1974. And at that time—it’s hard to believe it now—but in that time, 1974, the fundwe raised, which was $19 million, was 45% of all of the private venturemillion, of which we raised $19 [million] and we were the only fund thatraised $10 million or more.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, who else was there? Dennis: Kleiner Perkins, I think, started in ’72 and they raised $7 million. And therewere some other funds around too. Mayfield was around, Tommy Davis andMayfield. Tommy Davis used to work at Kern County Land Company, andTommy and I used to get—when I was with Fireman’s Fund, we’d gettogether and we’d talk about maybe we’d ought to set up an independentcompany to do these kinds of investments. We couldn’t figure out whether wewere going to call it Davis, Dennis or Dennis, Davis, so we never did gettogether.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] Was that really the only reason? Dennis: Oh—no, I think we just were both a little timid too. But then he ran intoArthur Rock and Davis and Rock—he, Tommy, he clearly got first billing theway the alphabet works, so that was that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now that Prudent Man law—or is it a law? What is it? Dennis: Well, it’s a rule that—it’s called the Prudent Man Rule, but it in effect it getsinterpreted by the courts and therefore—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yeah, and that was legislated—and wasn’t that one of the changes that camein in the late seventies? Dennis: Well, I don’t know, because we were never subject to it. So you’ve really gotto— <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What I was trying to— Dennis: I was just subject to a finance committee that decided whether we weremaking money or not.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, you had said over lunch, and I know this is jumping ahead a bit, but that1980 was probably the best year for venture capital, ever. Dennis: Sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And I know there was some legislation in the late-seventies and in 1980 thatdefinitely gave a stimulus to venture capital. Dennis: Certainly, and the two things that did it, and I was very, very much involvedalong with David Morgenthaler of Morgenthaler Associates from Cleveland.The two of us were both officers of the National Venture Capital Association[NVCA]. And we spent a lot of time in Washington, DC talking tocongresspeople. But 1978 was the—we were back there in late-’77 and I know that we talkedto, in the fall of ’77, we talked to the chairman of the Ways and MeansCommittee [Wilbur Mills?]. Just David and myself were in his office talkingto him and he said, “Gentlemen, I understand your arguments and yourproposition, and I agree with you and I think that that is something that needsto be taken care of.” But he says, “Quite frankly, I don’t think that capitalgains will even come up as a subject of discussion in this session of thelegislature.” Now this is in the fall of ’77, and in May of ’78 [telephoneringing] we had a law. [interruption for telephone call and short pause inrecording].<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Okay. You were starting—or are you not finished? Dennis: Well, what I was going to do—yeah, I’m not quite finished. I was talkingabout ’77 and ’78 and—[leafing through some documents?] where the hellis ’78? Well, I don’t seem to—I don’t have the right one here, but—at anyrate, I’ll find it. I’ve got it somewhere and I’ll get it organized by next time.But this was back in the days before we had Palm Pilots.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] It looks that way!  Dennis: This was the predecessor to the Palm Pilot.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is it? I’m still using a system like that! [chuckling] Dennis: Well, I’m looking here to see—I know I had it in here. Just a minute—you’renot rolling now, are you? I hope not.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What are you looking for? Dennis: I was looking for the date of our meeting with the chairman of Ways andMeans—and in terms of the really, the big boom in—the big boom in venturecapital—it got—you have to give Jimmy Carter the credit for this becauseearly in ’77—first off, Nixon was the one who really jacked up the capitalgains rate at one stage of the game, to the point where it practically killed theventure business. That was Nixon’s problem. And then Jimmy Carter camealong and said, early in ’77 he said we should get rid of all of the distinction,all of the differences between ordinary income and capital gains. He said wejust should wipe it out completely. Well, that so incensed the venture capital industry on the one hand and theAmerican Electronics Association on the other, which was very active here onthe peninsula—and it got them galvanized into action in a way that nobodyelse had ever been galvanized before, to get together and do something aboutthis thing. If it hadn’t been for Carter’s statement that we should get rid of allof the distinction between ordinary income and capital gains, I think we wouldhave drifted along, and they would have nickeled and dimed us to death bymaking small changes all along the line until the industry was wiped out. But as a result of Carter’s statement, the American Electronics Association—and this is an important part of the venture capital story on the peninsula; itgalvanized them into action. They did a survey of their members—they hadsome 600 and some odd members, and I think they got 400 responses to thissurvey. But they sent out a survey that required the financial officers of eachof their member companies to go back into their archives and come up withthe tax returns from the previous five years, and who do they pay the taxes toand so forth and so on. That was all put together in the form of a testimony. Iwish I had a copy of this testimony—I’ll try and get a—we should try and geta hold of a copy of it—but testimony that Ed [Edwin Van Wyck] Zschaumade before Ways and Means in March of 1978. In that testimony—we had been talking to enough congresspeople, and the[American] Electronics Association and the [National] Venture CapitalAssociation worked very closely together, but we’d been talking to enoughpeople in Congress and they said, “We, the Congress, we can create a job at government expense at a cost of about $25,000 a year.” That’s how much itcost us at that time to put somebody to work. And that would be a job likesweeping the sand off Ocean Beach, or something. As soon as the $25,000 ayear funding stopped, the sand would roll back in and the job would be overand done with and the guy would be out of work. We proved—Zschau and the Electronics Association, I should say, provedthat if you encouraged the venture capital community to invest $13,000 in oneof the electronics companies in their association, that you created—not onlydid you create a permanent job, but within five years, the various taxingauthorities, the city, county, state, and federal taxing authorities, would begetting a 30 percent return on our investment. We sat in front of thesecongressmen and said, “Gentlemen—we would love to get a 30 percent returnon our investment. But if I can get a 30 percent return on your investment—that’s even better! That’s even better!” And it was that argument and thatsurvey put together by the Electronics Association with the support of theVenture Association that really turned the tide. It was an absolutely fascinating process because we got to some congressmenwho really believed us. And Ed Zschau’s testimony before Ways andMeans—I was there; I testified on the same day, different testimony—I can’tfind a copy of that either, but nevertheless, it was that that caused this thing tohappen. So I can remember when David Morgenthaler and I visited an undersecretaryof the treasury one day in his office, and he totally stonewalled us on thisthing because he worked for the Carter administration. He didn’t have anysympathy for us at all. But, as I walked out of his office I noticed there was aNew Yorker cartoon on the back of his door, so I went over and I looked at itand a little cutout of a typical New Yorker cocktail party with two men talkingto one another and one of them says, “Venture capital—do you rememberventure capital?” This industry was essentially dead and gone as far as thesepeople were concerned. And yet—that was in the spring of ’78. We had this testimony in March, andin May we had a bill passed that reduced the capital gains rate from 48 percentdown to 28 percent. And then in 1980 there was another bill passed that tookit from 28 down to 20. Now the first bill in ’78 was sponsored by Bill [William A.] Steiger fromWisconsin, a congressman who died a few years after he did this, but it wascalled the Steiger Amendment. And he, in effect, spearheaded it through theHouse. He needed somebody in the Senate to carry the torch, and he got ahold of Hansen—Senator Clifford [P.] Hansen. Clifford Hansen was a senatorfrom Wyoming. He had already announced that he was going to retire and hewas not going to run for reelection, so he was a lame duck. But CliffordHansen was one of these people who was extremely well-liked in the Senate, and he was somebody who a number of people over the years had asked himfor this or that or some favor, or help me to support this bill or that bill. Hewas very, very helpful to a huge number of people and he had never asked foranything in return. So Steiger got him convinced that this was the right thingto do. Alan Cranston, who was our senator from California at the time and who wasthe Democratic whip in the Senate—he supported us in spite of the fact thatCarter was on the other side of the table. I can remember meeting withCranston and I said—I’d known Alan Cranston from some previous activitiesand I said, “Alan—the electronics industry in California is the second largestemployer of people other than agriculture—and these are your constituents.”So Cranston, as the whip, signed up and was supporting us. Well, Hansen took the bill, which became known as the Steiger-Hansen Bill,and he hand-carried that around the Senate. And before he was through, hehad sixty co-sponsors and there’s just no way the Carter Administration couldfight it. So that’s what got the first reduction; the second reduction came in1980. That’s why I say 1980 was the best year to start a company, becausemanagers just came pouring out of big companies to start their own—therewere more startups started in 1980 than I think almost any year in the historyof the business until recently.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And there was also increasing worry at the national level about America’scompetitiveness. We were worried about the Japanese and—there was afeeling that we were slipping, whereas since the war we had prided ourselveson— Dennis: On being ahead.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yeah. Dennis: Being the leader. No, there’s no question about that. There’s no questionabout it, and I think that concern has grown in recent years, continued togrow, but nevertheless, that’s what in effect what got us off the—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All right. Well, we kind of skipped into Institutional Venture Associates,which then becomes Institutional Venture Partners. Dennis: Venture Partners in 1980. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: {unclear} which means, does it not, that you had come to a decision to leaveFireman’s [Fund]/American Express? Dennis: American Express. Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why was that? Dennis: Well, in 19—what year did we start this thing—’74.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: ’74. Dennis: So in 1973, actually—no, in 1972—it was in, I think, May of 1972. At thattime I was—my official title was I was president of the American Expressgroup of mutual funds headquartered in San Francisco. I was writing moreletters to shareholders than the chairman of American Express was. We had avery successful group of mutual funds and I was president of it, but I realizedthat the handwriting was on the wall, and if I kept my nose clean and got onemore promotion, I got to move to New York. And they didn’t tell me whatfirst prize was, but I didn’t consider that to be first prize. And so I went to my boss and said—Fred Merrill was then chairman of all ofthe mutual funds, but he was a very inactive chairman, and I went to him and Isaid, “Fred, what I think we ought to do is you ought to retire as chairman. Letme become chairman, you bring in a new president and CEO, whoever youwant to to run the mutual funds, and I’ll get out of the fancy office and movedown in behind accounting somewhere in a smaller office. I will chair themeetings and I’ll do whatever I can to help your new president through thetransition, and I’ll run the board meetings and so forth and so on. And whenyou tell me you no longer need me, I’d like to get out of here. I really want togo into the venture business full-time.” I said, “I had 125 people working forme; I’m a lousy administrator; I’d much rather make investment decisions andI don’t want to move to New York. I really don’t want to be part of that bigsocial hierarchy at a major American corporation.” So that’s in effect what we did, and I stayed on for fifteen months after I’dtold him that I wanted to leave, and continued to operate out of that smalleroffice and bide my time until we were pretty well established with a new CEOon board, and it didn’t look as though—there was no management upheaval,which was—we had so many public shareholders in all the mutual funds Ididn’t want it to look like a big management turnover. So it was a veryfriendly departure.  I was in New York a few months before I was scheduled to leave, and thepresident of American Express then was a fellow named Bill [William H.]Morton, and he—I was walking down the hall one afternoon a little after 5:00and his door was open and he saw me and he yelled at me and said, “Reid!Come in here for a minute.” So I went in and he said, “Are you sure this iswhat you want to do?” And I said, “Bill, I’ve never been so sure of anythingin all my life.” And he said, “Well, we don’t want you to go, but if you’redetermined to go, you should take some of our money with you.” And so wesat down that afternoon and on the back of an envelope sketched out aboutfour or five conditions under which they would put up the first $5 million of afund that would be $15 [million] to $20 million in size. And that’s what—because American Express was putting in $5 million, it’s what allowed us,really, to call it Institutional Venture Partners.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh I see. I was wondering about that. Dennis: And then we went out and all we talked to were other insurance companiesand other institutions and foundations—but not pension funds. So that’s howwe ended up—knowing—we knew who the other insurance companies werethat were possibilities, and that’s how we did all of that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How much did your reputation precede you? The fact that you had animpressive record in terms of your past investments? Dennis: Well, I think they—[pause for tape change][End Audio File 2]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All right. What I asked was how much, if at all, did your reputation as aninvestor precede you, now that you were throwing your net wider trying to getother institutions involved. Dennis: Oh there’s no question about the fact that that helped a great deal. And it alsohelped a great deal that somebody like Jim [James S.] Kemper, Jr., who wasone of the first people we went to see, could call Fred Merrill and he knewFred Merrill and talked to him, and Fred would give us a great boost. And fora while, the vice president of the Kemper Insurance Company, who was incharge of the investment department, used to refer to this as Kemper’s Follyuntil our first fund began to turn out pretty damn well. And God, we ended upwith somewhere around a 38 or 40 percent return per year to all of the investors in our first fund, and then it became his brilliant investment ratherthan Kemper’s Folly. But he took ownership of it. I can remember going into Mutual of New York in New York City with mypartners, and the fellow in charge of that particular—a very senior fellow whowas very close to retirement, and it was amazing to me that Mutual of NewYork, this guy would make this kind of an investment decision, a ten-yearinvestment decision a matter of months before he retired from Mutual of NewYork. But he looked at me and said, “Oh Reid, we know who you are. I wantto talk to your partners here and find out who they are.” [chuckling] So there’s no question about the fact that—the fact that I’d been in theto ’73—twenty-one years made it an awful lot easier to get in the door. Theyall thought they knew exactly who I was and I, at various investmentmeetings, security analyst annual meetings and things like that, you wouldnaturally come to learn who the investment officers are for New EnglandMutual or the Penn Mutual, or one of these other companies. So there was sortof a camaraderie there that helped us get over some of those early hurdles. Noquestion about the fact.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was this a first-time investment of this nature for most of these institutions? Dennis: Absolutely, yeah. It certainly was for Kemper and it was for Mutual of NewYork. I think that Penn Mutual may have made one other. It was new for NewEngland Mutual.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you find that there was any difference between the East and West Coast interms of willingness to participate or familiarity with what you were trying todo? {unintelligible} Dennis: Well, you did not have a lot of other major institutions on the East Coast.Pacific Mutual Life out here—they didn’t get the message. I remember wetalked to them, but they didn’t go—. Fireman’s Fund/American Express didnot want us to approach Transamerica because they considered Transamericaa competitor in the insurance business, so they said, “Look, you’ve got to putthe fund together, but if you can do it without Transamerica, so much thebetter.” So we sort of avoided—there are more insurance companies that werecandidates on the eastern seaboard, and that’s why we originally went with—.New England Mutual actually introduced us to New York Mutual. We had a$2 million minimum, and New England Mutual didn’t think they could get upto $2 million, because we made it clear from the very beginning that wewanted very few limited partners and we wouldn’t take more than $20million. So we had this $2 million minimum.  Well, Kemper came in for $3 million; that clearly was above the minimum;American Express in for $5 [million]. We went to see New England Mutualand they said, “We don’t think we can get to $2 [million], but we’d like you togo down and talk to our friends at New York Mutual Life, MONY—Mutualof New York, that is. And we did. We went down to see them and we alsocalled on New York Life. I don’t think—New York Life didn’t do it, I don’tthink. But at any rate, we went down to see MONY and MONY had a veryinteresting reaction and it was largely because of this guy who was about—who was very equity-oriented but who was about to retire as head of theirinvestment department. He went before their finance committee, and theirfinance committee consisted of a bunch of—like ours really—a group ofCEOs of big major corporations. I can remember [Charles C.] Tillinghastfrom TWA was on their board and a bunch of people like that on theircommittee. One of their committee members said, “Well, you know,” and they had gonein with a recommendation that they invest $4 million in this fund. One of thecommittee members said, “Well, why don’t you invest $5 million and then getcontrol of the documents and you can write the agreement.” [chuckling]And—“All right, that sounds pretty good.” And they came out of that meetingand said to our friends at American Express, “You people are really not arm’slength investors here because of Reid’s prior association with you, so we’llwrite the agreement and we’ll represent the investors.” So I called back New England Mutual to thank them for the introduction toMutual of New York and said that Mutual of New York was going to put in$5 million and then they said, “Gee, if we invest a million, that means onaverage we’re in for $3 million apiece with Mutual of New York, so we’reabove your minimum! Can we get in?” [chuckling] So we said, “Sure.” So weended up with $19 million out of the $15-$20 [million] that we were aimingfor, and we would not have taken another million dollars from anybody else,so we wanted a small group of investors and that worked out extraordinarilywell—very, very well. They all felt as though they had a major ownershipinterest in our fund and then they participated.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So it was a wise investment. Dennis: Oh it was a very, very, very wise decision. And it’s too bad—that’s anotherthing that’s changed in this industry today. We had participants in this fundwho—when they’d get a distribution from us—if their original investmentwas big enough to be a legitimate portfolio holding, if they got a distributionfrom us from one of our successful investments—it was big enough, in eachindividual case it was big enough for them to pay some attention to it, put an 40analyst on it, understand what it is that they were getting in the way of newstock. I know that in the case of ROLM [Corporation], which was one of the bigsuccesses down here on the peninsula, early entrant into the digital telephonebusiness—in the case of ROLM, Mutual of New York still had something like60 percent of all of their ROLM stock when IBM finally bought them out.They just made buckets of money on that sort of thing. And in those days it was legitimate—at least it was possible—for us to callour investors and say, “Look—we’re about to distribute some stock in theXYZ company. One of us is on the board. We’re going to distribute the stockin kind, but I will tell you that my partners and I are going to continue to holdon to whatever we get as part of this distribution because we think thiscompany has a long ways to go.” And as a result of that, we madestockholders out of our limited partners who rode with us for a while. Today, if you distribute any in kind, all of your limited partners—there are somany limited partners they get a little dinky tiny piece of it. They don’t getenough to make it worth their while to spend any time analyzing it. They thinkof it as a liquidity event and they sell it. They just blow it out. So that is amajor change in the industry in the last twenty years, twenty to thirty years.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You mentioned partners in IVA who stayed. Dennis: IVA, right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Who were they and why? Dennis: Burt McMurtry.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And who is he? Where did he come from? How did you know him? Dennis: Well, Burt worked with Jack Melchor down here—you know, I don’t knowhow we got introduced to one another, but he was in the process of leavingMelchor, or had left him. And we met—Burgess Jamieson worked at Bank ofAmerica.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And you knew him? Dennis: You know, I don’t know how I knew him. That’s going back a long way—1973. That’s longer than I can remember! <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] Sorry. I’m just wondering why this particular group of men cametogether to form this new institution. Dennis: Well, I think we were all sort of interested in it because Jack Melchor hadbeen in the venture business and Burt worked for him, and so somehow wegot together. I think Burt may have known Burgess and that is the way it—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It might have been that way. Dennis: We got together that way.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And were there just the three of you partners? Dennis: There was a fourth partner in the beginning—Jim Norris who had worked forme at American Express. He came in as the junior partner. Unfortunately, hedied a few years later, so it was primarily the three of us.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is it relevant to talk about your early investments? Dennis: It is, but I’ll have to do some homework on that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Okay. Well, maybe— Dennis: Should we call it—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Should we stop now? Dennis: I think so. We’re at a place where we’re rambling a little.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] Okay. Dennis: And that’s my fault. But is that all right? [End Audio File 3]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Today is February 10, 2009 and this is the second interview with Mr. ReidDennis. We are in a different location this time, which we will talk about aswe move up through the chronology. Last time, we ended with your formationof IVA and talked about the first fund, but you mentioned just now off tape,that in the 1970s, which was when, if I’m remembering right—IVA wasfounded in 1973? Dennis: That’s—1973.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You said that the industry, the venture capital industry, of course, almost died. Dennis: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So why? [laughter] And what did that do to you? Dennis: Well, the industry died I think largely because of some changes in the taxlaws. President Nixon was the first one to raise the capital gains tax in adramatic way so that it moved up, and it was essentially up to the point whereit didn’t make any difference whether you were working for a job and payingincome tax or whether you were building an estate and building an asset andthen selling it and paying tax on the profit. The tax rates were very, very closeto the same. That really depressed anybody’s desire to invest in long-termprograms, and a venture capital investment is a long-term investment. These funds were typically—the first ones were set up for seven years.Certainly the first Kleiner Perkins fund was a seven-year fund. I think the firstMayfield fund was a seven-year fund, and I know that Draper, Gaither, andAnderson was a seven-year operation. It was largely not because the peopleinvolved thought that seven years was the right period of time—it was thatthey thought that was about as long as they could get people to sit still forletting them manage their money.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I was wondering that. Dennis: And really—we’ve had some funds now go on for fourteen and sixteen years,just because they have some valuable assets in them, there’s no liquidity in theasset, and you hate to throw it away.  We have one of our funds that has really one primary asset, and it’s acompany in the medical equipment business. They got into a bunch oflawsuits over their technology with people like Johnson & Johnson and others.They won those suits because Johnson & Johnson had infringed on theirpatents and they got so much money that came in as a result of having won thelawsuits that they don’t really need to go out and go public and raise money—they have more money than they know what to do with, but it’s still aprivately held company—a very successful privately held company. But itwould be a shame to—and our limited partners really don’t want us to justdistribute the securities to everybody, and they end up with a non-marketablesecurity.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Isn’t this some sort of marker for the maturation of the venture capitalindustry and the investor’s confidence in it? That they’re willing to leave theirmoney in the investment because there’s been enough history to show that, insome cases anyway, it pays off? Dennis: Well, the other thing also is that we’ve already given them back all of themoney they invested in that particular fund.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, all right, I see. Dennis: So they’re playing with the house’s money, so to speak. And we’re down tothe last—we’ve given them back and given them a good return on theirinvestment. So these last few things—troubled, now the word is toxic assets,but the last few troubled investments where you just cannot get liquidity andget marketability, they’re willing to leave them with us and let us worry aboutmanaging them because we know more about it than they do and they don’twant that headache. And when the funds get to be that old, we don’t chargethem a management fee, we just charge them whatever our expenses are, andour expenses are very minor. So in this one case of this one fairly successfulcompany, the company pays for board expenses and things like that, so there’svery little that comes out of the fund. And as I say, it was a fairly successfulfund. They got all their money back plus a nice return on it and they’re just—they’re very relaxed about leaving us with what’s left behind. But the thing that really killed the venture business was the fact that capitalgains rates had come up so close to ordinary income rates that it just did not—if you were a senior manager at Hewlett-Packard or one of the othercompanies up and down the peninsula here, it just didn’t seem like taking therisk to go out and start something new which might or might not be successful[made any sense], if you were going to get taxed on the profit at the same ratethat you’d get taxed working at your present job. So middle managers did not want to leave and start new companies, and that’s what really killed theprocess of starting new companies. I can remember clearly in one of our visits to Washington, DC and visitingwith an undersecretary of the treasury, on the back of his door as we walkedout of the office I saw a New Yorker cartoon, and this was in—probably in1977, in the spring of ’77. I’d moved the door so I could read the cartoon, andit was two people at a typical New Yorker cocktail party, two gentlementalking, and one of them said, “Venture capital. Remember venture capital?”That is about as far gone as you can get! It wasn’t until Jimmy Carter, bless his heart, came along—and with a veryunusual result—but he came along and said we should get rid of all of thedifferential between ordinary income and capital gains. They all ought to betaxed exactly the same. Well, they’d been nickel-and-diming us and taking alittle bit away at a time, and Carter came along and wanted to take the wholerest of the pie. And that one statement on his part galvanized the AmericanElectronics Association and the [National] Venture Capital Association intoaction. That’s when we began to really spend some time talking to theTreasury and to Congress and senators and so on in Washington, DC, andstarted a full-court press to, in effect, tell them that they were killing the goosethat was laying these golden eggs.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Which must have eventually gotten through, and I don’t know what thesequence was here— Dennis: I do. [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But in the later years—I’m sure you do—in the later years of the 1970s, theCarter Administration began to be worried about the U.S. losing outcompetitively, particularly against the Japanese. It would seem to me that itwould be a natural that you would try to promote an industry that, after all,was into innovation and new company formation and boosting technology andall of this American technology. Dennis: That’s true; I think that is absolutely true. You’d think—once the propositionis explained to people, they can catch it. They catch onto it very, very quickly.And there is no question about the fact that—and we’re coming up, right now,to revisit this whole argument, because there is so much static about what iscalled the private equity business, and they are going to increase the taxes onprivate equity. In the process of doing that they’re probably going to throw thebaby out with the bathwater and increase the taxes on venture capital, andthey’re not the same. That’s what almost killed us before and we’ve got to besure it doesn’t happen again if we can.  I think that the point you make though, about explaining it and aren’t we onthe same track, was absolutely the correct one, because in the fall of ’77 DavidMorgenthaler and I went to Washington, DC.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now you told a little of this last time. Dennis: Did I?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, you did. Dennis: About Wilbur Mills?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. Dennis: Okay, well, then that meeting with Wilbur Mills—he agreed with us. Heagreed with our arguments. He said, “Absolutely. But this isn’t going to comeup at this session of the Congress.” And yet eight months later we had a bill,and it was that bill reducing capital gains that came through in May of ’78 thatreally opened the floodgates of the venture capital business.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And do you credit the information that you were sharing? Wilbur Mills washead of the Ways and Means Committee? Dennis: He was chairman of Ways and Means.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you think that it was the education that you and Morgenthaler did that atleast were part of the reason that the winds began to change? Dennis: Well, we weren’t the only ones, because the American ElectronicsAssociation was back there telling the story also. And Ed Zschau, who washead of a small company here on the peninsula and later actually ran for andbecame a congressman, he was president of the American ElectronicsAssociation. He did a magnificent job of testifying before Ways and Means,and I’d say that that testimony, more than anything else, in March of ’78,really laid out the reasons in a very logical way. Out of Zschau’s testimonial,backed up by—well, I was there representing the venture capital industry andStan [Stanley C.] Golder was there representing the SBIC industry and SmallBusiness Investment Company industry. So all of these people were there andtelling this story, and I think that there is no question about it. We’re seeing itagain even today with our current financial crisis in 2009, that it’s better if the government can encourage private industry to create jobs, it’s better than thegovernment creating jobs that only last as long as the government is payingthe salaries.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And you got that message across. Dennis: And we got that message across.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yeah, and of course, in a sense you were helped, and I put that inmetaphorical quotes, by the changing culture of the times, namely this worrythat the United States was falling behind. Dennis: Oh I think that’s true. That’s true. An awful lot of innovation was comingfrom Japan and Germany, and there’s no question about the fact that there wassome concern about that. But I think that the real question was did we havethe incentives in place to motivate people to take risk, and I’m talking aboutmanagers getting out of a comfortable job in a big company going out andstarting something new because it was a good idea and going with it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So talk a little bit about what that spring of 1978 change in the capital gainstax—what was the immediate effect? Dennis: Well, the immediate effect was to create—an awful lot of new companiescame into the venture capital business. Had I known how many competitorswe were going to create, I don’t know that I would have necessarily workedquite so hard on trying to get the bill passed! [<|endoftext|>
Interviewer laughs] But clearly itwas the best thing to do. And then of course the capital gains rate was reducedagain in 1980 and that really opened the floodgates.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yeah. I believe you either said or I read that you said that you’ve believed that1980, until very recently, was probably the best ever year for IPOs? Or was itfor startups? Dennis: It was the best year to start a company.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Start a company. Dennis: [It] was 1980 because they’d reduced the capital gains tax, and managers wereleaving big companies and going off on their own in droves. That is whatreally opened the floodgates. It was the best year, I think. And it was a surprise, because when we raised a new fund in 1980, that was the first IVPfund, and that fund—we told our investors that we would only probably doone or two startups because they’re so time-consuming. We started off withjust a couple of partners and we didn’t have time to do a lot of startups. It turned out that in the next year after we started that fund, instead of doingone or two startups, we did six or seven startups because they were socompelling! We had entrepreneurs coming in and sitting around ourconference table and telling us a story that just captured your imagination asto what you could do. And of those—I think we only had one that really didn’twork out very well. So most of the others, out of seven, I think six of themwere wildly successful. So that was a great fund and that was the first IVPfund in 1980.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, maybe we should go back to IVA/IVP. I’m interested in what thesignificance is in the change in the names of the partnership. Dennis: Sure, sure. IVA—Institutional Venture Associates was started by BurtMcMurty, Burgess Jamieson, and myself. [brief interruption] At any rate, weran that fund from ’74 until 1980, and at that time Burt McMurtry decided hereally wanted to go off on his own, start his own fund. I was the guy that wasthe driving force behind getting IVA going, and so he wanted to start his ownfund. Burgess Jamieson wanted to take it easy for a while, and I wanted tokeep going. But they didn’t want me to continue to use the name IVA becausethey didn’t want it to look like continuity if there was no continuity. So I said,“Fine. I’ll change it. We’ll call it Institutional Venture Partners.” So the firstIVP fund was started in 1980 and we’re now up to IVP Roman numeraltwelve.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: My heavens! And you’ve been the general partner and manager of all thosefunds? Dennis: I’ve been a general partner, not the general partner. But I’ve been a generalpartner of all but IVP XII, IVP XII is the first one in the series that I’m just anadvisor, and it’s about time for this particular former venture capitalist toretire and get out of the way of the young people that are coming along.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How do you feel about that? Dennis: I love it! [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: More time for flying and San Francisco prints?  Dennis: And for prints, San Francisco prints, trying to find a home for all of the SanFrancisco prints that I’ve amassed over the last thirty-nine years—longer thanthat, isn’t it?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. Dennis: It’s longer than that. Seventy-three, so it’s—but anyway—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: There’s not a dearth of things to do. Dennis: Well, it’s thirty-six years, I guess. It’s the twenty-ninth year of IVP, and it’sprobably the thirty-sixth year, thirty-fifth year of the total thing. So it’s beenfun and interesting, but I have a lot of knowledge about some of these thingsthat I’ve collected over the years and I want to get that knowledgedocumented or written down before it’s gone.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yeah? Do you think of writing a book? Dennis: No. I’m not up to writing a book, but I have probably—one of my sons gaveme—I haven’t tried it yet—a machine that you can dictate into and it’ll typeout on the computer screen what you’re talking about. If that worksreasonably well then I might start using that. But I’ve written a number oflittle things that go around the walls in our offices saying pretty much what Iknow about certain prints, but there are certain prints that I haven’t yet had achance to deal with.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, would this be a good time to pick up on one or two, or perhaps eventhree companies that you think might illustrate some of your principles ofinvestment? Dennis: Sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Are they all in the forefront of your mind? Or shall I make some suggestions? Dennis: Well, no, they’re not all in the forefront of my mind, but there are certain onesthat stand out. You wanted both some successful ones and some unsuccessfulones.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I would like to hear also about the unsuccessful ones, yes.  Dennis: Well, in IVA, probably the one investment that did more for us than almostanything else was our investment in ROLM—R-O-L-M [spells], which was acompany that was an early entrant into the digital telephone business. Theydeveloped a telephone that was unlike any other, and Burt McMurtry was thelead on that. He knew the people at ROLM and brought them in, and we likedthem and we supported them and we made a major investment there. And westuck with it. It’s really interesting—when ROLM went public, the underwriter required usto sell some of our stock to help make it a true public market, so I think wehad to sell 5 or 7 percent of the stock we owned in ROLM, which we didn’twant to do because we thought this company had a long way to go. Well, itturned out—I can’t remember what year ROLM went public, but as it turnedout the stock came out and went down. So it went down and we went into theopen market and bought back what stock we had sold and a little bit more—and so we ended up with our position again. And we held onto that stock for along, long time. I think that we really had, I’d say a philosophy of looking out—you can onlylook forward maybe somewhere around eighteen to twenty-four months in ahigh-tech company. And we’d hope we could look forward two years and geta feeling for what the company was going to do. We would hope that wecould look at it a year later and extend our horizon again bit by bit.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And is that simply because, or not simply, but one of the reasons becausetechnology is just evolving so quickly? Dennis: Because technology is evolving and changing and you’ve got to keep up withit. And you get competitors and things do change.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yeah, so it’s different than selling cereal. Dennis: Oh absolutely, yeah, absolutely. But I think in this business, we put an awfullot of stress—in our organization—we put an awful lot of stress on themanagement team that was going to run the company. We rarely invested inone-man shows. I would say that one we did later, one of the 1980 ones was—I’ll get to—we did invest in a one-man show and I’ll have to get my mindcranked around to that one. But by and large we liked to invest in a team ofthree or four or five people, and we liked to have the feeling after interactingwith these people that we really would enjoy working with them. You haveenough choices in this business that you don’t have to work with everybody,and if you don’t think you’re going to enjoy working with somebody, forgetit—life’s too short. 50 Now that philosophy—this is one of the places where I have a very differentpoint of view than Don Valentine at Sequoia, because he says, “If themarket’s big enough, I’ll change the people.” Well, changing people is apainful thing for them; it’s a painful thing for you. As far as I’m concerned, Ithink there are better ways to get along in this life, and you can do very, verywell by betting on the best people and people that you’d enjoy working with. I can remember one company that we did that turned out not to be verysuccessful, and I can’t remember its name now, but Burt McMurtry said,“You know, these people are good enough that if this particular idea doesn’twork out, they’re going to come up with something else that’s going to workout. And that turned out to be true. The business changed quite dramatically aswe went down the road, but we continued to work with the people, enjoyedworking with the people, and it came out. It was all right. It was a goodinvestment. There are some other investments that you get involved in because ofemotion. I know I was involved at one company that was not terriblysuccessful. [It] was a company called Collagen Corporation, whose originalproduct was going to be an improved burn dressing for burn victims. I thinkone of the toughest things I ever did in terms of due diligence was to go downto the hospital in Santa Clara and go through the burn unit there. I had to getall scrubbed and gowned and masked and everything else, to see people thathad huge burns over—remember this was the time of the Korean War. The treatment of burn wounds was very much a cottage industry. One hospitalwould have one way of doing it, another hospital would have another way ofdoing it. There’s a big army hospital in Texas that had their own way of doingit. The principal material that was used at the time was pig skin, to coverplaces where there just was no skin at all. The problem was that after a while,after several days, the pig skin would start to get rancid, or not do its jobanymore and they’d have to take it off and put on a fresh dressing—extraordinarily painful to the burn victim. So these people had a great idea of coming up with this burn dressing madeout of collagen, which is the major component of skin anyway, and I thoughtthat was going to turn out to be successful. Well, it was never successful as aburn dressing. It turned out to be that it was more successful as something toget rid of wrinkles and divots and—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh really—which was not your motivation. Dennis: Which was not our motivation. We came out all right on it, but not anoverwhelming success. I know that for a while my partners used to refer toCollagen as our annual reinvestment opportunity, because the company had a terrible time trying to get to the point where it could support itself—but itfinally did.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now did that hold any lessons for you in terms of being motivated by emotionrather than the cold, hard statistics? Dennis: Oh sure, yeah, but on the other hand—no, it’s—I think that in my feeling,even today, it was worth taking the risk. Had we been successful with the burndressing, it would have been a wonderful thing for a huge number of people,and I’m sorry we weren’t. I really am sorry we weren’t. The management ofthe company was able to find some other things to do to make enough moneyto give us a payback and to give us a profit, but I think there are times whenyou have to say to yourself—it’s sad to have to go in to visit one of thesethings, but at least I got to see what the problem was, and I’m glad we gave ita try. I really am.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right. Well, it’s a perfect opening, as I see it to ask you whether one of themany things that I presume you consider in regard to a possible investment isthe social impact of the company. Does that enter into your thinking? Dennis: Well, the social impact—it rarely comes up, but I would say that there arecertain things that we probably wouldn’t do just because we wouldn’t be veryproud of being in that industry. So I would say, yeah, that it does have animpact, I think. We’re primarily interested in the high-tech field, but ifsomebody came along with a new pair of glasses that made everybody’sclothes invisible, I would say we probably would not invest in it. [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, you know, I associate, and I’d like to hear if you correct me, withventure capital and high technology—and of course I know that there areinstances where it’s not a high-tech company, but as a general rule do you seeit as not only in your partnership, but in others, that investments tend to be inhigh technology? Dennis: Well, it all depends on the firm, obviously, but our focus has been ontechnology. There’s no question about the fact that it’s been on high tech.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why is that? Dennis: Well, it was a field that we thought we knew. Burt McMurtry got his PhD inengineering; I got a degree in engineering. Burge Jamieson got his degreefrom—mine came from Stanford, a little school out in the West, and BurgeJamieson got his at MIT. So you had three partners that were all engineers. It was at a time when there were not a lot of—when we first got started it was atime when there were not a lot of people in the investment business that reallyunderstood high tech, who could sit down with a technician or a group offounders of a high-tech company, who could talk about their proposed planand their proposed product line or product area, where there were not a lot ofpeople in the financial industry that could understand what they were talkingabout. And yet if you had an engineering background, I think our biggeststrength was the fact that we understood what engineers were talking about. I never thought of myself as being a creative engineer. I’m not somebody whocould come out of thin air to create something that would be a gee whiz orwow kind of product, but I think that if I sat down across the table fromsomebody who had a gee whiz idea, I could appreciate what the market forthat product might be, how important it might be, and also how difficult it wasgoing to be for the founding team to actually solve the technologicalproblems. Now sometimes you can get too far ahead. You wanted me tomention something that didn’t work out very well.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What do you mean by too far ahead? Dennis: Well, there’s a saying that it’s easy to tell the pioneers, because they’re theones that have the arrows in their back! W invested in a company back inBoulder, Colorado called Reference Technology. Reference Technology hadthis idea of taking the 14-inch Sony videodisc and converting that into adigital storage machine. The idea of taking a videodisc and using it for digitalstorage was brand new! The problem with Reference Technology is that wewere probably five years ahead of the time we should have been, because theywere too early but they had a great vision. They said, “Some day we’re even going to distribute software to computerusers on discs! Now can you imagine such a wild thing!” I could not. How thedevil would you ever—going to distribute software on disc. Well, now wedistribute software over the Internet, but for a long, long time we used to goand get one of these little CDs and slip it in your computer and away youwent. But we were just too far [ahead], and these 14-inch discs werecumbersome. Then of course they came out later—Seagate came out with an8-inch hard drive, or I guess a 5-inch hard drive was—Seagate was—the firstone was a 5-inch hard drive. And then they kept getting smaller and smallerand smaller. Reference Technology was not a successful company. It had a greatmanagement team, good technology, but they were too far ahead of where themarket was. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, unpack that a little bit, because I think you’re on to something that’svery important—because it’s too early in what regard? It could be manythings—a supporting system, and then you’re mentioning that the laterproducts, I guess you could say, were more convenient, more efficient,because they were— Dennis: And smaller.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Miniaturized. But what about the people— Dennis: Well, there wasn’t enough of a market for people with a 14-inch disk drive.You just couldn’t make that market grow fast enough before suddenly IBMcame out with the 8-inch and then Seagate came out with a 5-inch.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see, so they broke the ice but they couldn’t— Dennis: They broke the ice and they sort of pointed the way. Other companies gotahead of them by coming out with smaller units sooner, before you could get afoothold in the industry. And of course, you could go too far the other way,too—because we went on down to smaller and smaller and smaller things, andwe finally ended up with a company called {MiniStore?}, that had a little,dinky disk drive—and that didn’t work well for us either. So we gotsnookered on both ends of that technological curve.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Thinking back to your testimony, if that’s the word, your lobbying inCongress where education, to put it simply, was one of the things or maybethe main thing you were trying to do—where does that fit in, if at all, here. Ifyou have a revolutionary new idea and then you’re going to pack informationon a disk, how much education do you have to do of the public, the supportingindustries, maybe your potential competitors—what goes into introducing abreak-through product?: Dennis: Oh boy. Can we take a break here? [interruption in recording]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [resuming recording]—taking a whack at that question I asked you? It will berephrased and don’t be intimidated [Dennis laughs] because I know it’s a hugequestion. Dennis: I can’t remember what it was. I just remember that I needed a break when Iheard the question. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I asked you something along the lines of what does it take to introduce a newtechnology—including the whole infrastructure that has to go around it andalso just public receptivity or lack thereof. Dennis: Sure. Well, I think by and large, introducing a new technology—we reallydon’t get involved with technologies that are going to go generally—didn’tuse to get involved, I should say, with technologies that were going to gostraight to the public, to the public market. Technology really was—the technological innovations usually found theirfirst markets in industry, in other companies—in other high-tech companieswho were doing a certain function, such as an IBM or—we used to use taperecorders for recording digital information on an IBM computer. It wouldhave rooms full of tape drives with these things roaring around, and the diskgoing back and forth. And of course, then when you come up with the harddisk, the first IBM storage disks were big, huge things again. So they had pioneered the idea of digital disk storage. For companies such asReference Technology, the reason that they were trying to break into that fieldwas the fact that here was a relatively inexpensive consumer product, meaningthe Sony audio disk player that maybe could be adapted. There was already amarket because IBM had gone out and sold a great number of machines atfairly fancy prices, and if you could come in with something based on Sony,so much the better. I’m trying to think—there was a company called Exabytein Boulder, Colorado, which was one that [spells] E-X-A-B-Y-T-E—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, I’ve got it here. Dennis: Exabyte—and Exabyte was taking a small Sony recorder—and I’m trying tothink what it was, whether it was a disk drive or a tape drive.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I have magnetic tape data storage products. Dennis: Okay, all right. Well, as tape recorders got smaller and were used mostly formusic and voice recording, Exabyte took a fairly small, inexpensive Sony taperecorder and made it into a data recorder. It was really sort of funny, because Iran across this particular company—it was located in Boulder, Colorado andwhen I described it to my partners, they thought I was absolutely out of mymind. So we all got in an airplane and went back to Boulder, Colorado and itwas the first time I think the whole partnership had ever gone anywheretogether like that. We all went back and after it was all over, we went backand spent a day at Exabyte, and they shook their head and said, “You know,you’re right. This thing has tremendous potential.”  And Exabyte was—they thought I was over the hill, or out of my mind orsomething—I can’t remember. But at any rate, they finally decided that, byGod, this was a good deal. So we made an investment, and Exabyte turned outto be fabulously successful for one of the early IVP funds. And indeed we putExabyte into some other funds also, so we helped the Stanford Engineeringventure capital fund by putting some over there, and it turned out to be a verysuccessful deal for us. But by and large it was taking existing technology and changing theapplication. But rarely—now with the pervasiveness of the Internet, it ispossible to distribute something to the public through the Internet in a waythat just did not exist early on. We didn’t have the Internet. Gee the first time Isaw an Apple computer—small, little desktop computer, I couldn’t figure outwhat the heck that would be used for. Who would want one of those?[laughter] And then, of course, when they got up to the point where gee, you can get awhole megabyte of storage on a disk or—I think—it’s hard to believe that weget things that were operating at certain speeds that we thought were veryadequate, and the fact that you had to wait five seconds before you brought upthe next window, it didn’t seem to bother you. But speeds kept getting fasterand faster and faster and faster. Now unless you’ve got umpteen gigabytes ofstorage and all these things—. It’s hard to believe, but the applications todaytake up so much more memory than we ever in our wildest dreams thoughtcomputers would ever use!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You know, it seems to me that in the way that you chose to work with peoplewith whom you were comfortable—can that also be said of the technology orthe business that you are investing in? That, if I’m understanding you right,when you say that in general you did not invest in companies or in productsthat went straight to the public—was that perhaps because then you’d have toget into a whole new realm of endeavor? Namely creating new markets anddealing with sales forces and all those things that I’m presuming you didn’thave experience with? Dennis: Well, we did not want to get into the consumer enterprises or consumerproducts, because there is a huge risk, not in—does the device work—butthere’s a huge risk in: Can you get it to the market and will the consumer buyit? But in most of these business to business technologies, you can always finda few customers here in Silicon Valley that will buy one of anything. They’llbuy one of anything and just try it and see if it works. And so they’re almosttaking too much risk not to try it, because if one of their competitors tries itfirst, then you’re in trouble if they like it. But more and more capacity, fasterand faster, faster and faster, more and more capacity, that’s been— <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was your technical background, your engineering background, allowing youto keep up with these changes on a technical basis? Dennis: It allowed me to keep up for quite a while. I’ll have to admit, maybe in the lastten years, I’ve fallen pretty far behind. My younger partners today talk aboutvarious products on the Internet that I just don’t have the slightest idea—creating virtual realities on the Internet and why people want to use them andall those sorts of things beats the dickens out of me. And I never reallythought that computer games would do what they’ve done. There are so manyconstructive things that you have to do in this world. Who’s going to sitaround playing—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: The answer is a lot of people! [laughter] Dennis: Yeah, I know! I know! I understand that; I understand that now. I didn’tunderstand it then that people would set aside other things for games, althoughI must admit that there was an early solitaire game that I loved to play on thecomputer, but unfortunately the company that made it didn’t keep up.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I notice, I think, that aside from Collagen—was that what it was called?That most of your investments, as far as I can discern, are not biomedical. Dennis: Well, as IVP grew, we went into the biomedical.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you? Dennis: Yeah, and we actually at one stage of the game split IVP into three groups.We had a biomedical group which was headed by Sam [Samuel D.] Colellaand Becky [Rebecca B.] Robertson and {add name }—oh my—and another partner.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You’ll get another whack at this. Dennis: That’s embarrassing. I can’t remember his name.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You’ll come up with it.  Dennis: And then we had what I would call a computer and communications groupthat was looking at startups, and then quite frankly Norm Fogelsong and I andMary Jane Elmore formed a group to do later-stage and public market.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Really—later-stage! Dennis: Later-stage and public market.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why would that be your predilection? Dennis: Well, partly it was a predilection because all the way back to IVA we alwayshad in our partnership agreement the ability to buy public stocks, but werestricted it to public stocks where we knew something about the company.That would be in the high-tech area. It wouldn’t be public stocks that ourlimited partners would feel comfortable buying on their own. But for instance,I mentioned to you that we had an investment in ROLM as a private company,and when it went public and the stock went down, we bought more. Webought it back again, and more. Well, an awful lot of venture capitalpartnership agreements do not permit the partners to buy public stocks.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Really, what is the rationale there? Dennis: Let’s talk about what was the rationale. The rationale for allowing us to buypublic stocks was the fact that I had spent twenty-one years at Fireman’s Fundand American Express managing public stock portfolios. And there weretimes when we wanted to be able to buy some of these less well known hightech stocks. We made a lot of money in them at Fireman’s Fund, buying little,dinky stocks. But at any rate, we bought some other high-tech stocks when themarkets were down the chute. Particularly if we were already an investor in it,had become an investor through the private—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You mean in the field or in the— Dennis: In that particular company.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh I see. Dennis: If we were a private investor in the company and then it went public and gotinto trouble or the market got into trouble—it didn’t have to be the companygetting into trouble—. We knew an awful lot about certain companies.  When Seagate—Seagate was one of our most successful investments in thefirst IVP fund—we made that investment in 1980 and it went public I think in1981, in the fall of ’81, we owned a lot of the stock and it came out and thestock went down. And we said, “Gee, this isn’t right.” Actually—I’m wrongon that. What happened is Seagate filed in the fall—and I’m not sure whichyear it was but I think it was ’81. In the fall of ’81 they filed to go public andthe original filing range was $18 to $20. And then we had a terrible decline inthe stock market, and the next thing I knew, they reduced the filing range from$15 to $18. And then the next thing I knew, they’d reduced it $12 to $14. Itwas supposed to come public the next week and then finally the next day. I called Tommy [Thomas I.] Unterberg at a firm called Unterberg andTowbin, who was one of the underwriters and I said, “Tommy, what’s theSeagate offering look like now? What’s the pricing look like?” And he said,“Reid—would you believe $10 a share?” And I said, “Tommy, would you likean order?” And he said, “Reid—that would be like manna from heaven!” Andso I said, “Well, we’ll give you an order to buy 50,000 shares at $10 a share.”And that’s what allowed the company to go public.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Wow. Isn’t that amazing.[End Audio File 4]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You were telling me about the $10 offering. Dennis: At Seagate.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. Dennis: Well, it’s—at any rate, so we gave Tommy Unterberg the order to buy 50,000shares, which is half a million dollars of Seagate stock. Our originalinvestment in Seagate had been—was a half a million dollars. But that was at50 cents a share. So there are a lot of investors, once they’ve paid 50 cents ashare would never think about buying something at $10. We owned this verylarge block of stock at 50 cents a share, and then in order to help with thepublic offering and also because we thought it was a good investment, webought the second tranche at $10. [cell phone ringing] So we held on to our$10 Seagate stock and in less than a year the stock was back up to $17, orsomething like that. Or I should say it was up to $17, and so we sold it. Wesold a high-cost stock and we made 70 percent on our money in less than ayear. That’s not a bad return. And we just held on to the low-cost stock.  And then finally on the third anniversary of the fund, we distributed theSeagate stock to all of our limited partners. Now this was the IVP I fund,which I think only had nine limited partners. But the thing that was interestingabout it, and it’s an interesting contrast with the world of venture capital as weknow it today, is at that time, on the third anniversary of the fund, we gave allof our limited partners back three times the amount of money that they hadinvested in the fund in terms of the value of the Seagate stock. Seagate all byitself gave them three times their money back. And that was extraordinary.And so from thereon out after three years, not only were we playing with thehouse’s money, but they had already gotten a very good return on it. And it’sremarkable to be able to do that in such a short time frame.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yeah, how did that compare to what other venture capital firms were doing inthat era? Dennis: Well, I don’t know. It has to be one of the more successful investments for thetime—1980 to ’83. But the thing that’s different about today is that our fundsare so big and we have so many limited partners that any one investment, evenif you’d made umpteen times on your money, by the time you distribute itamong all those limited partners, they have such a small holding that it’s notworth their time to learn something about it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, then why don’t the general partners limit the number of limitedpartners? Dennis: Because they want the money to get the management fees to—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But they could—well, this is naïve, I’m sure, on my part, but couldn’t it be setup in such a way that if you want to be part of this you have to invest thismuch at least? Dennis: Well, that’s true, and people do have minimums, but nevertheless, the fundshave gotten so big, they’ve gotten to be multiple hundreds of millions ofdollars or over a billion dollars—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But explain to me why that would be. Dennis: Because so many people want to invest in the venture capital business, andthat’s different than it used to be. We had to struggle in the first IVA fund toraise $19 million in 1973-’74. It was much easier, but our first IVP fund in1980 was a $22 million fund. Because of the success with Seagate, we never 60took down the whole $22 million; we only took down three quarters of it. Butfunds were relatively small then. It was the success of the eighties that got everybody and their brotherinterested in investing in the venture capital field. And so a whole group ofinvestors—pension funds and state funds and so forth and so on began to getinterested in this area, and then of course, there was the change in the PrudentMan Rule that allowed pension funds to invest freely here.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But I would also think there was your record of success. Dennis: There was a record of success which was great while funds were small—andit was spectacular. And now there are still some funds that have hadspectacular records: those that invested in Google were spectacular. There arevery few Googles, you know. There are very few really big home runs likethat, but if you look at the history of financial bubbles over the centuries,whatever has been very, very rewarding for a good period of time usuallyattracts too much capital and the returns go down. And that’s exactly what’shappened to the venture business.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And also true, would you say, of the roaring nineties? Dennis: That’s absolutely true of the roaring nineties, sure. The nineties were a greatperiod up until the very end, till the bubble burst in 2000.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I have several questions in mind, but would you also say that the orientationof the new venture capitalists coming in, or maybe it wasn’t just the new—butinstead, as you’ve made so clear, that part of venture capital is building thecompany, sticking with it, if you’re going on the board making sure as bestyou can that this company is going to be a success. Has that kind oforientation changed in recent years? Dennis: I think it has in that there are so many people investing today in companiesthat they are—they’re trying to build the companies in order to sell them tosomebody else, instead of building the companies to last.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Getting their money back. Dennis: You know, it’s a question of built to last or built to sell. It used to be that wewere trying very, very hard to build something that would last and last andlast. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Does that still characterize your philosophy? Dennis: I don’t think you can do that today in the same way because there are so manyother things that come into play.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Like what? Dennis: The demand for liquidity on the part of your limited partners and—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And you can’t talk them out of that? Dennis: No, oh no.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why, why? Dennis: Because they have their own performance records to show to their financecommittee.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So everything’s interlocked. [chuckling] Dennis: And as you get bigger and people’s investments are smaller—we gave ourlimited partners so much Seagate that they had to learn something about it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Exactly. There’s no incentive. Dennis: If you just give them a little—you give them a little dab—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: They don’t care about the company. Dennis: They don’t care about the companies. They get a little dab of this and a littledab of that and someone says, “Well, why don’t you just sell the stock in thefund instead of distributing in kind.” Well, in many cases, because you have aconcentrated block in the fund, you’re subject to all sorts of restrictions onhow much you can sell in any period. You’ve got to report it all. Somebodysees—Oh they’re selling, they’re beginning to sell—that means there’s goingto be pressure on the stock for the next year and a half while they try toliquidate and get out of it. You’re much better off distributing it, and hopefully trying to distribute it in a good market where there’ll be receptivityto it. But it’s—there’s a lot that has changed, so it’s anyway—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All right. Let’s see. Would you say, and this is another probably impossiblequestion because you kind of implied it already, that your investment strategyor your investment style, however you want to characterize it, has changedwith the times? If that indeed is true, are there certain core principles, corevalues that you insist on holding on to? Dennis: Well, number one, you’ve got to remember that I’m not a general partner inthe current fund. So I don’t want to speak for the current fund.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: No, all right, well, don’t bring it up that far, then. Dennis: But I would say that certainly through IVP X, we continued to invest in thesame way. [IVP] X and [IVP] XI. We’re still looking for the same sorts ofthings, but it’s hard—it’s hard to stick with exactly the same rules that youused to apply, when the world around you has changed as much as it has. Soyou’ve got to play the game the way the rest of our industry is playing thegame. We used to have a lot of time to make up our mind. We used to have—I meanrelatively to what is true today. We used to have more time; we put muchmore emphasis on knowing the people and being comfortable with the people.We still put a lot of emphasis on the people, so that hasn’t changed. Butyou’ve got to make up your mind about the people in a hurry because thereare so many competing firms now, and if good people started going aroundraising money, if you don’t jump on it and get after it right away, you maylose out. Plus the fact that the other thing that has changed is that we used to have to domore or less our own due diligence. It was our own thoughts about atechnology or an area. Today with the Internet, there is a huge amount ofinformation available on almost any subject that you can think of. It’s like—go research this area or that area—it’s like opening a fire hydrant. There’s atremendous volume of information that comes at you, and so you’ve got tohave analysts to sort through all of this stuff and summarize it. You’re on amuch faster timetable, and it’s much less of a personal business today than itused to be.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yeah, it sounds like [it]—how do you feel about that? Dennis: I’m glad I was in it when it was more of a personal business. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] Right, I bet. What about IVP’s reputation, though? Not only haveyou been around longer than most of your competitors, but you have, as I’vesaid before, a record of success so that when you’re competing forinvestments, investors, doesn’t that give you a leg up over many? Dennis: Oh it does, no, no. I think that the fact that IVP is a well known name; it’sInstitutional Venture Partners; it’s been around for a long, long time and theyknow that. I think the other thing is that IVP raised Roman numeral X in theyear 2000. That’s nine years ago. Venture capital firms are sort of measuredby vintage year—when was the fund started, what’s the rate of return been?Well, the year 2000 was the year the bubble burst. IVP X is one of the fewfunds in the nation that has returned all of its original capital and has apositive result. There are other funds, most of the other high-tech funds lostmoney for their investors. So to be a partner in a group of funds that has a2000-vintage year fund that made money, separates you from the pack. So it’san indication that I’ve done pretty well in selecting my successor partners.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, it does. Dennis: And that we as an organization have done a good job of bringing youngerpeople into the firm, and they’re doing a good job. That’s about all you canleave them with is trying to bring bright, young people in and let them havetheir head and see what happens.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Again, I think you probably have answered this, [Dennis chuckles] but I’ll askyou the questions anyway. Talking as a venture capitalist, or looking atyourself as a venture capitalist—and I know you’re many other things—whatdo you think are your greatest strengths and perhaps your areas of weakness. Dennis: Well, I think that the venture capital business is something that—it’s abusiness that it really pays off to come into it after you’ve had a fair amount ofexperience doing something else. I think it’s a business that you’re probablybetter off entering in your thirties and forties than you are entering it in yourtwenties, because you need to build a frame of reference by which to judgepeople and to judge opportunities and to be able to judge markets and what’sgoing on in the economy. So that I think that—let’s see—I was in my, I guessin my forties when we started the first IVA fund as an independent fund. I’dhad the experience of working, doing venture capital investing both atFireman’s Fund and in American Express before I came down here.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And on a personal level in {unclear}.  Dennis: And on a personal level. So you have to build that frame of reference thatallows you to sit down across the table from somebody.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I would think so. Dennis: And be able to make some judgments as to whether—is this person really—he’s probably telling me the truth. He or she, telling me the truth as they see it.Are they capable of doing what it is they say they’re going to do?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yeah, now is that intuitive? Dennis: An awful lot of that is intuitive. It’s intuitive and it comes about through justexperience. You can’t build that frame of reference and get that experienceunless you’ve been around for a while. And particularly, I think it’s a mistakefor people to jump out of college and say, “I want to go into the venturecapital business.” Because typically the entrepreneurs are going to be slightlyolder than you are. Not always, but slightly older. If you’re dealing with agroup of entrepreneurs that are six or eight or ten years older than you are,they’re going to say, “I want somebody on my board of directors who hasmore experience than I have, not less experience.” And so—you’re a betterboard member; they’re more liable to take your advice and counsel if you seesomething that they should be doing. I don’t think you have to have,necessarily, gray hair, and you don’t have to have as little hair as I have, butnevertheless, it’s important that you do have some experience.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Nobody so far, of the people I’ve interviewed, has talked about the process oftaking a company to the public market. Are there some generalities, or wouldit be easier for you if you talked about a specific company that might beillustrative? I want to know the context, how the decisions are made that thiscompany is ready to take to the market, and what you’re looking at to makesuch a decision, because I imagine it’s more than just where the company is. Dennis: Well, it is, yeah, it is. It’s usually—the process of going public usually startswith the fact that the company is growing fast enough that it needs to raisesome additional capital. We typically will invest in a company for two or threerounds; we like to support our companies. If we get in early, we’ll invest inthe second round and third round. And as I say, in the case of Collagen, mypartners used to refer to it as our annual reinvestment opportunity [<|endoftext|>
Interviewerchuckles], but after a while, the company’s needs, if it is growing, thecompany’s needs gets beyond the capabilities of the venture capital firm tocontinue to support it in a meaningful way, and then you should turn to thepublic.  Plus the fact that if they’ve done it the way most companies do, you have agreat number of stockholders that are within the company, that are actuallyworking in the company, and they want some liquidity. They have wives andchildren and pets and things that need to be supported. The wife wants tobuild another wing on the house or buy a new car, so there’s a pressure for afree market in the stock or a public market in the stock that would allowemployees to get some liquidity. And then there’s also the pressure on the part of the venture capitalists to beable to give a marketable stock out to their investors where they can make thatdecision as to whether they hold it or sell it. It also gives—in some cases, it’llgive the venture capitalists the opportunity to say, distribute the stock to all ofthe partners including the general partners. And the general partners may beso close to the company that they want to hang on to it. And you can do that—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Really—that’s been your experience? Dennis: That’s—well, it used to work that way. Now there’s so much pressure put onany market, any time a new market is created for a stock it is very, very hardfor it to perform well because there is so much pressure for liquidity. Part ofthat is from investors who—we have many, many limited partners who areinvested in a lot of venture capital funds, and they have a lot of capital callscoming periodically. Not all the time, but periodically they have more capitalcalls because we don’t take down all the capital on day one. You take it downover usually over a three- or four-year period. So they have pressure on themto supply new money to funds they are already in; they’d like to get somemoney back from their current investments and recycle those dollars.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. Excuse me for interrupting. But where, if at all, does the state of themarket figure into all this? Dennis: Oh well, it figures very prominently in it, because if the market isn’t doingwell, you cannot take or you should not take a company public in a marketthat’s about to tank or is very unstable. One of the problems that we had with the Seagate example that I gave youwas we were going to go public in a market that turned out to be undertremendous pressure, and it went down, down, down, down. It was partlybecause somebody who wrote a market newsletter, who was very, verynegative on the market, made a tour around Europe and kept telling everybodythat the world was coming to an end and coming to an end and coming to anend. Every time he gave a speech, the market went down just that muchfurther. So it was a terrible time to go public, but they needed the money andso they went public. They ended up selling the stock at a lesser price than they had hoped to, but nevertheless it was a successful offering. The stock neverwent down after it came out at $10 a share, so all the public stockholdersmade money. I think that’s something else that has changed today is that we’ve had an awfullot, in the recent two years, really, we’ve had a number of companies gopublic that have never seen—come out and gone down and have never seenthat price again. And that’s too bad because what we’ve done is we’ve sort ofsoiled our own nest in that the public gets tired of buying stocks that go down.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] Yes! Dennis: And I don’t blame them! I don’t blame them. I wouldn’t want to do thateither. If our industry keeps pushing things out the door, and the publicdoesn’t want to buy them and they go down, they’re going to walk away fromus. So there has been some of that going on.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, we were going to end with the current state of the market, but it seemsto me that there’s a segue into that discussion right now if you want to saysomething briefly about what the current economic downturn is doing to theventure capital industry. Dennis: Well, we’re in the beginning of 2009, this is February of 2009, and the markethas been very, very volatile. But I think that what really is going on today isthe fact that the whole economy is in terrible shape. This is the fastestdownturn in the economy that we have ever experienced since the GreatDepression. It’s the fastest, the sharpest; unemployment is going up fasterthan it has for a long, long time, and I think it’s going to be quite a whilebefore any new high-tech companies can go public and have a good result forthe public investors. Now having said that, we see a number of public stocks—way back in thebeginning, way back in the fifties and sixties we used to—when the high-techmarket was just beginning to become known—and you have to remember thatwhen I got out of school, there were no publicly held electronics companieson the peninsula, so this whole thing was a relatively new phenomenon. WhenHewlett-Packard went public, David Packard recommended that people sellthe stock because he thought it was overpriced. And of course here hecouldn’t have been closer to the company—and he couldn’t have been morewrong! People that disregarded his advice and bought the stock and held ontoit made a lot of money. But nevertheless, back in those days, we used to say that if you could buy—you couldn’t look at earnings; you couldn’t look at price to earnings ratios because these companies were growing so fast they were out in front ofearnings. They were plowing money in and investing money into things atsuch a rate that it was hard for them to earn money. So you had to relate thevalue of the company as represented by the stock price to sales, to the revenueof the company. We used to say if a company was growing rapidly, and youcould buy it today at one times sales, or maybe 1.2 times sales, or 1.3 timessales, you had a pretty good chance of making money as sales kept going up,if you were convinced sales would go up and you ignored the earnings of thecompany and just looked at sales. A couple of years ago I can remember sitting around the table and listening tosome of my younger partners say, “Gee, this company looks like a pretty gooddeal because it’s only three times sales, or four times sales, or five timessales.” [chuckling] And I’d have to wince and say, “Gee it really looks good atthree or four times sales.” Well, we now are back to the point where you’relooking at price to sales ratios of again we’re back to about 1.5 times or 1.2 or1.3 times sales. I think we’re back to the point where there are a lot of hightech companies that are rapidly growing companies that are pretty attractivelypriced today. Now can they get overpriced again? Sure, yeah, they can. But Ithink that when you can buy things at say, say less than 1.5 times sales intoday’s market, that’s a pretty good long term investment if you’re right onthe future of the company and the growth in sales.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What do you do in a down market, though, about the momentum that youtalked about, to get liquidity? Dennis: You’d better get liquidity on the way up. You’ve got to have liquidity on theway up and you have to have more capital that you can draw on. You’ve gotto keep some powder dry for times like these. We’re glad, my partners areglad they haven’t taken down all the capital in IVP XII yet, and we still havesome capital to call on and some investments to make at these lower levels.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So it sounds as though IVP anyway isn’t drastically hurting. Dennis: Oh things could get better, but—we’re not drastically hurting because we haveliquidity. What we really have going on in our country today is an incredibleliquidity crisis where people who have gotten used to, during the past twentyor thirty years, they’ve gotten used to a certain pattern with their banks of—ifI have this kind of a deal I can go to my bank and I can get that kind of moneyand I can carry on my business. Now you go back to the same bank with thesame kind of deal, the same sorts of terms, you’re in the same business, andthe banks say, “We don’t want to lend you the money.” We’ve got a liquiditycrisis that has frozen up the banks in a way that has never happened before inthe fifty-five years that I’ve been in business. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yeah, not since the Depression. Dennis: Not since the Depression.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, switching subjects—or do you want to say more on the currentsituation? No? Because I’m thinking of you and your colleagues in venturecapital as barometers, if you can use that term, of the state of new business,and in your case, anyway, high technology, at least in the region that youconsider for investment. In other words, a repository of new knowledge. Andwhat does that really mean? Is that a service or an advantage—I don’t knowquite the words to use—that should be more widely utilized than simply—okay, deciding that I’m going to invest in this company or that? Dennis: I’m not sure that I understand the question. Try it again.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, it seems to me, because presumably—or maybe I should ask thatquestion—reading business plans must be part of the job, right? Dennis: Oh sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That seems to me a source of knowledge, and a source of knowledge aboutvery specific innovative technologies in a way that I can’t imagine quiteanother parallel source of information. I’m not quite sure where I’m goingwith this question either, but you—with my looking at it very narrowmindedly—you’re using that information to decide whether I’m going toinvest in this company or I am not. But it seems to me that knowledge, thatbulk of knowledge—if you multiply it by the number of venture capital brainsthat are absorbing this information—that it’s a tremendous pool of financial,technical, business information that it seems to me could be used for otherpurposes. Dennis: Well, let me back up for a minute and say that there have been a number ofinnovations that have come along that have had a major impact on industryand economies. Certainly, one of the reasons we have steam engine modelsaround here is the fact that the invention of the steam engine and the fact thatit allowed people to do more than just muscular work—they could improve ontheir own muscular strengths and use machines to do work. And then, ofcourse, the development of the electric grid, so to speak, was another stepforward in terms of energy for people. Certainly the switch from the horse andbuggy to the automobile was a major innovation. It’s interesting to take andplot, on a logarithmic scale, the distance that one person can travel in one dayversus time. The reason the California Missions are all about thirty-five miles apart is the fact that that was about as far as a person could ride a horse in oneday; that’s about the maximum. And then, of course, along comes theautomobile. Now the bankers in New York were very, very skeptical about the automobile,and they thought it was a European fad that would never catch on in thiscountry. You go back and you read or listen to some of the history of HarveyFirestone talking about the development of the automobile and the rubbertire—it was hard to get financing because the New York bankers just felt thiswas not going to last.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because the distances were too great? Dennis: No, because the horse and buggy was so reliable, you know!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh I see, and why would you want to go— Dennis: And we didn’t have roads! You didn’t have any roads; we didn’t have 280 andwe didn’t have all these—so things relate to one another. Now in our time, of course, we’ve had—first you had the development of thevacuum tube in the early part of the last century, and that brought on radiosand things like that and eventually television. But then huge innovation cameout of World War II, and we developed radar and microwaves and things likethat, and frequencies that we’d never dreamed of generating before—higherand higher and higher and higher frequencies. And, of course, in our time, inthe time that we’ve been in the venture business, the biggest innovation hasbeen the development of the microprocessor, and it’s gotten faster and fasterand faster and smaller and smaller and smaller. But the major hurdle, themajor innovative breakthrough has already occurred in that area, andcomputers will continue to get smaller. Computers will still continue to getmore powerful. But it’s going to be evolutionary, looking forward, rather thanrevolutionary. I think probably the next big innovative changes are going tocome in the biomedical field rather than the electronics field.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And why do you say that? Dennis: Well, because we have so many unsolved problems in the biomedical field.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And you’re implying that the others are evolutionary. 70 Dennis: Yeah, and I think we still have unsolved problems in the biomedical field thatare available for pioneers and experimenters to still innovate in. I think we’relearning more and more and more about the human body all the time. Sothere’s an awful lot to be done in that field in combating disease, whereas Ithink that what’s going on in the electronics industry is going to be muchmore evolutionary. Sure we’ll go faster, and sure it’ll broader; everybody willsoon be connected to everybody else—and it’s going to be terrible! [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, this is a wonderful discussion, but I think in the interest of time weshould move on to such things as the wider context. I’m wondering—youknow you spoke very well about how some of the legislative changes at theWashington level had had a huge impact. Are there other things of that naturethat—either at the governmental level or I don’t know quite what else—thathave had a direct shaping effect on the way venture capital has evolved? Dennis: Well, we’ve talked about capital gains already.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, we have. Dennis: That’s terribly important. I think that one of the things—there are someproblems with the tax laws that need to be corrected. I hope in the process offixing some of the problems that exist today that they don’t start raising thecapital gains tax again on venture capital firms, because I think that’d be amistake. Now the current rate is 15 percent. I don’t think it makes anydifference at all whether that rate is 15 percent or 20 percent. But you getmuch above 20 percent and then that tax begins to be a tax that preventstransactions from taking place. It becomes a block to transactions; peoplewon’t sell something because they don’t want to pay the tax, or it becomes atax on inflation—if we ever get to the point where we have an inflationaryeconomy again. But if people bought a house a long, long time ago, and ifthey sell it today an awful lot of the profit is just keeping up with inflation—and should that be taxed? So I think that there are two directions to go here. As I say, I don’t think itmakes—I think anywhere from 15 to 20 percent is perfectly acceptable, andit’s not an economic impediment to the redeployment of capital to its mosteffective use. And that’s what we’re really talking about. The capital gains taxis a tax that, if it gets too high, will prevent the redeployment of the capital toits most effective new use. There’s no point in reducing it further, because the capital gains tax—it’sinteresting—you look at this history. When it was reduced from 48 to 28 andfrom 28 to 20 [percent], the actual capital gains revenues went up because there were more transactions! I don’t know what happened from 20 to 15, butobviously if you go to zero, revenues are going to go to zero, so there’s nojustification for taking the capital gains to zero. I think that’d be a big mistake.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is there talk of that? Dennis: Well, there’s talk about maybe you reduce it to zero for one year. Well, that’sterrible! Because that makes everybody short-term investors or something.And there are people in long-term projects who need to sell when the righttime is, and you shouldn’t have the tax laws determine the timing of the saleof some asset. So I am perfectly happy to see capital gains, long-term capitalgains for the venture industry in this range of 15 to 20, and I’m not going toargue whether it’s 20 or 22 or 18, but nevertheless, it’s in this range. It shouldnot go down to zero. The other point is that in trying to fix certain problems, the taxing authoritieshave really fouled up the tax on stock options, and that should be corrected.One of the things that really made Silicon Valley as successful as it has turnedout to be was the fact that for a long, long time stock options were available.Stock options are a way of allowing employees all through an organization tobecome partial owners of that organization. Well, some big companies—and the worst offender was Chrysler in givingLee Iacocca options on millions and millions of dollars worth of stock. Inorder to prevent that and the favorable tax treatment on people like Mr.Iacocca, who was really getting compensated for a job—it wasn’t toincentivize him to become an owner of a large block of Chrysler stock. But in order to correct that problem they changed the rules on stock options sothat now instead of being able to exercise your option and hold on to thestock, now if you have an option to buy stock at $10 and it goes to $50 andyou exercise the option at $10 and you own the stock at $50, you are liable forthe tax on the day you exercise it at the $50 price. If it goes back down to ten,you still owe your tax on the 50 bucks, and you don’t have it anymore. So itreally forces employees who have stock options to, in effect, sell their stockwhen they exercise it because they can’t afford the risk that it could go downand they would owe the tax at a higher price.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see it. When did that tax law come in? Dennis: Oh a couple of years ago.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Really?  Dennis: Yeah, and it’s something that really needs to be corrected, because theyshouldn’t have to pay the tax until they sell the stock and then the tax ought tobe due on the price they get when they sell the stock. That’s the way it used tobe and that’s the way it should be, and that’s why virtually everybody atHewlett-Packard was a stockholder. All the employees were stockholders, andbroad stockholdings in the high-tech companies has been a hallmark of ourindustry. During the most successful parts of our recent history, it’s one of thethings that really made it work and people all felt, goddangit, I’ve got anownership position here, and this is my company as well as your company andyour company and your company.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right, yeah, and so all that motivation you had lost. Dennis: Now it’s lost. It’s absolutely lost. And you’re just scared to death that if youdon’t get out while the getting is good, you’re going to end up owing the tax.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is the idea that is so prevalent and has been as far as you’re saying for somany decades in Silicon Valley—that employees have stock options andhence an incentive to contribute and stay at a company—is that a West Coastidea? I know that the big firms elsewhere used to give their executives [stockoptions]. But as far as I know it wasn’t a policy that every employee in acompany got stock options. Dennis: No, and it still isn’t. You have to be there a certain period of time; you mayhave to be at a certain level.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But if you’re a dishwasher? Well, maybe a dishwasher isn’t a good—becausethey’re often concessions. Dennis: {Franchises?}, yeah. But no, no, no, there have been requirements that youhad to be an employee for a year or a year and a half—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But it’s not—what I’m trying to get at though—it’s not a discrimination onthe basis of your status in the company. Dennis: It hasn’t been, no.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: No, but I believe it has—originally.  Dennis: Well, it can be. It all depends on how broadly you want to do it. But HewlettPackard did it very broadly, Varian did it very broadly. Varian wanted all oftheir employees to be stock holders, and that was one of the ways they coulddo it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yeah, have you been in a position to give new companies advice in that veryarea? Dennis: Oh well, we usually do, yeah.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And what do you— Dennis: Well, you know, right now under the tax laws, it’s hard to know—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What to say. Dennis: —what to do, because I think it’s become pretty standard in our industry thatyou get fairly broad distribution of stock among—certainly among keyemployees, and then push it down as far as you can.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [to videographer] Ten minutes, period? Dennis: Okay, we’ve got to wind up.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: We’re running out of tape. Sorry about that. Let’s say something aboutCalifornia as a setting for at least one, if not the, major center for venturecapital in the world, on the planet. Dennis: Sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What influence, if any, has that had? Dennis: Oh I think that a lot of people have come to California and come to the BayArea and said, “Gee, we’d like to duplicate what you’ve done out here insome other part of the country or some other part of the world.” Well, the firstthink that they’d have to do is duplicate our weather.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] And they’re not going to do that.  Dennis: And that’s the hard thing to do. But by and large, talking about the technologyindustry, which is the one I know best, the centers have grown up around MITand Harvard. They’ve grown up around University of Michigan in Ann Arbor,and they’ve grown up around the Golden Triangle down in Raleigh-Durhamand—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Chapel Hill. Dennis: And Chapel Hill. And so they’ve grown up around universities. In the BayArea there are two competing centers—there’s a small one over in Berkeleyand then there’s the big one around Stanford, of course. [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I don’t know that I agree with that! Dennis: Well, I know, I don’t expect you to agree with it, but nevertheless—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: There is also UCSF, which is not known as exactly a laggard in this area.[laughter] Dennis: Sure, no, I know. At any rate, but we’re so lucky that we’re in the Bay Areawhere by and large we’ve had fabulous weather. And the weather does play arole here, because during World War II a tremendous number of people wentthrough California on their way to the Pacific, and they determined that theywere not going to go back to the Midwest. My gosh, you don’t have to shovelsnow, and all that sort of thing—you mean you never have to shovel snow?And look at what’s happened recently with the ice storms in the East. It’s justbeen miserable, so the weather has had a big impact. And then it’s a question of the university environment and in our case wewere blessed to have Fred Terman at Stanford, who really was the father ofradioengineering in many respects. He wrote the handbook, he wrote thetextbook, he gave lectures on it. He was the one who encouraged Hewlett andPackard to start their company; he was on their board for, I guess, his wholelife. He was a charming, energetic, and encouraging kind of person, and heloved to encourage people to start new things. I think that Lee de Forest, whodeveloped the first vacuum tube that had three elements in it, called a triode—his laboratories were down in San Jose. The Varian brothers that reallydeveloped the klystron that helped make radar a practical tool during WorldWar II—that was developed here. So these centers of high-technology development that have attracted venturecapital have grown up around universities. I think the same is true in England where I know at Cambridge there has been some innovation—less at Oxford, Ithink—a little stuffier. But it’s—but I don’t think you can necessarily exportwhat we have here. The other advantage that we have in this country versus the rest of the worldis the fact that we have—what is it—230 million people in the United Statesnow? Something like that? And we all speak, almost, the same language. Nowthere are some people from Texas that don’t know how to speak the language,but at least if we’re patient with them we can usually understand what it wasthey meant to say. I’m not thinking of anyone in particular.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I bet you are! [laughter] Dennis: But some one of the comics said that he was trying to quote George W. Bushand said, “Mr. Bush is alleged to have said—‘it’s too bad the French don’thave a word for entrepreneur.’” [laughter] I’m afraid that that’s not a truestatement, but nevertheless—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It’s a nice one. Dennis: It’s a typical kind of thing that he could do. We have three minutes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: There’s a lot been written and spoken about the so-called unique culture ofSilicon Valley in this area. Do you subscribe to that? It’s termed in adjectivessuch as it’s not risk-averse and— Dennis: Can do!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And can do and move on and speed and collegiality. Dennis: Look—we’ve had just a huge number of success stories here, and so I thinkthat that culture does exist. Plus the fact that this became a mecca for venturecapital firms because so many small companies were growing up around here.We started—one of the investments we made was in a company calledCorbin-Farnsworth, which now is the medical-electronics division of Smith,Kline & French. And it started in a little dinky warehouse over here off ofPage Mill Road; some guys just trying to take technology and apply it to newthings. Go down and visit it, like the people—“Sure, we’ll get the money.”That attitude has pervaded this area—of starting new things. And it feeds onitself because by and large over the last fifty years it has been a very, verysuccessful activity. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, [abrupt end].
Interviewer: Well, Mr. Bowes—it’s July 23, 2008, and this is our first interview. I’d like tostart way back with your parents and who they were and what they did andwhat it was like growing up in their family. Bowes: Well, my mother came from an orange ranch in southern California. She gotto Stanford and then she went on to Stanford Medical School. My father camefrom Chicago, and when he came through here in the army, he liked what hesaw and came back from Chicago and after the army went to Stanford. Hegraduated, came to San Francisco, never left. So I was born here, one brother,grew up, went to public schools, and then I went to Stanford.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you ever consider going anywhere else? Bowes: I didn’t apply anywhere else. [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Those were the days! [chuckling] Bowes: My high school, Lowell High School, even though it was a public school,seemed to have a pipeline into Stanford, so that if you went to Lowell youwent to Stanford.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You went to Stanford. That was all there was to it. Bowes: Of course Stanford was, in spite of being a private school, extremelyreasonable in those days, unlike now. After a year at Stanford I got draftedand went down to the South Pacific in the army infantry and then went to thePhilippines and then Occupied Japan and came back and resumed, in duecourse, Stanford.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did that military and wartime experience change any way you looked at theworld? Bowes: Oh it had to, it had to broaden you out, made you realize that it’s a big world.Occupied Japan was interesting too, living amongst a completely differentculture. It was very, very interesting. But I always had jobs, summer jobs andsuch, that were broadening in a knowing the world sense. I was a counselor ata YMCA boys’ camp in the Sierras. Most of the kids had never been out of the city, so that kind of broadens you out. I had a job up in construction inAlaska, and I had a job up in the forest industry in Mendocino County. I madea point of getting out and around—out of my comfort zone. So after I gotthrough Stanford I decided to go to business school, and went back toHarvard.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And why business school? Bowes: Well, I thought about being a doctor, but I didn’t make it through frog cutting.[laughter] I decided business school would give me a way of looking atwhether I wanted to be in business or not. I decided I liked business.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. Was that anything to do with your father’s profession? In terms of theinfluence. Bowes: Yes, probably. He’d been in finance. He worked for a Chicago firm. He rantheir San Francisco office—he and his twin brother together. He stayed inbusiness all of his professional life. So I didn’t want to do what he did, but Ithought something related to business would be fine.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And what was his business? Bowes: It changed a lot over the course of time [chuckling]. First he was in theinvestment banking business, and then during the Depression he foundinvestments for some Texas oil people who had money. He found them realestate investments in California. Then he got into the hotel business and endedup owning, with his brother and some others, several hotels here, which heeventually sold and retired.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Could you describe him as an entrepreneur? Bowes: Yes. He didn’t have much choice, without a job—you’re an entrepreneur! Hedid lots of different things just to get by, really. But that all ended well. Theywere always very gentle, kind people. My mother having gone to medicalschool, they had lots of medical friends, and I think it was a very nice familyenvironment for me and my brother.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It was unusual in that era—aren’t we’re talking about, what, the thirtiesmaybe?  Bowes: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: For a woman to go to medical school. Bowes: She went in the twenties.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, really? Bowes: She was—there were two women in the class and they became very goodfriends. [laughter] She graduated in 1925, got married within three or fourmonths. They decided not to get married until after she’d passed her stateexams, which she did and they got married. And the rest is family history.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. Was there a lot of discussion around the dinner table, or wherever, ofmedical subjects? Bowes: No, except that she forced me to eat things I didn’t want to eat like cod liveroil and carrot juice, and all that nasty stuff. But I knew it was for my owngood, at least that’s what she told me. No, she didn’t talk about medical stuffmuch, because her day was in two pieces—you know, work and play. So wehad conversations about everything in the world but not much medical.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And is your brother younger or older? Bowes: He died two-and-a-half years ago, but he was younger. Two years younger. Sothat was unfortunate, very sudden.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So Harvard Business School—and why Harvard? Bowes: I wanted to get East Coast experience. I’d never been to the East Coast exceptonce to go to the New York World’s Fair. I thought I should get away fromthe West for a while, and Harvard seemed like the best of the best. If you werea returning service person like I was, it was easier to get into Harvard than itwould have been otherwise.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was it, yes.  Bowes: Harvard Business School usually requires you to have two, three, four years ofwork experience before you go there, so I was not coming straight out ofcollege, so they figured the army was equivalent to work experience.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, was it? Bowes: Oh yes. When the war ended I was training to invade Japan. That would havebeen fun.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Where were you stationed in Japan? Bowes: I was between Yokohama and Tokyo. The higher ups were afraid that thesoldiers would go native or misbehave or something, so they made us stayinside these zones, and you couldn’t go outside your zone. So in spite of beingin Japan for well over a year, I didn’t see much of Japan except for my zone.Luckily it was Tokyo/Yokohama and about fifteen miles wide on each side, sothere was something, but it was—I missed the mountains of Japan. I missed alot.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, but if I’m remembering correctly, you were in longer than the war itself.Was that— Bowes: Oh sure, Occupied Japan you were in longer than the War.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see, so you stayed during the occupation. Bowes: Yes. The war ended in September or something and I went up to Japan inOctober, and I was there for a year.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. So it wasn’t during the war, it was just in the occupation. Bowes: If it was during the war, I’d be dead. [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] We don’t want that. Bowes: We were trained to invade Japan. The bombs dropped, the emperor declaredthe war to be over, the Americans had won, and so the Japanese people said, “Okay, the war is over. The Americans have won.” And the emperor said,“You now have a new emperor. His name is [Douglas] MacArthur.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, right, and he loved that [being treated as an emperor]! [chuckling] Bowes: Oh did he love that. I went up to Tokyo three times to see a spectacle whichwas every six days General MacArthur would leave his office at 5:25 and he’dgo home. And 3:30, 4:30, 5:00, Japanese would start to gather in the streetoutside of his office. So at 5:25 the door would open to the office and he’dmarch out with that magisterial stride he had and—he didn’t return salutes. Hehad a major general to do that. He’d stride into the car, this door would slamshut, and off he’d go. And four thousand Japanese would go—[a sound ofsharp intake of breath]. It made their day. Nine seconds of MacArthur hadmade their day.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] He could really play the part, couldn’t he. Bowes: But he had feet of clay too.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did he—in what are you thinking of? Bowes: Well, if you read David Halberstam’s book about the Korean War, you lose alot of respect for MacArthur, in how he ran that war. It was just disgraceful.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I haven’t read the book. Bowes: It’s about that long [indicating a very thick book?]—it’s called The ColdestWar, The Coldest Winter, or something. [The Coldest Winter: America andthe Korean War] It’s a very good book. He was very thorough. ButMacArthur was perfect for Japan. He just took right up where the emperor hadleft off and caused a terrific constitution to be written. It’s still theirconstitution today.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was it his personality to be regal and imperial? Bowes: I think it suited his personality. He had a huge ego. There’s another book onMacArthur called The Imperial something or other. And that’s a gooddescription—imperial. He walked like a king of the earth. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I diverted you from Harvard Business School, which was probably anentirely different kettle of fish. What did you learn there? Were there anymemorable teachers or memorable moments of any kind? Bowes: Well, I had a lot of fun there and made a lot of friends. I think the mostmemorable teacher was one of the original venture capitalists named General[Georges] Doriot. You’ve probably heard his name before.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, I have. Bowes: He was kind of like MacArthur in a way. All of the other classes at Harvard—they used the case method there. You read the case the night before and thenthe teacher calls on various students to discuss the case and what you woulddo in the situation. It’s very interactive. Doriot didn’t do any of that. He justgot up there, on a stage, if you will, and talked at us. He would discuss anyone of a number of things. It seemed random—it probably wasn’t. He wouldsay things like, “One thing you must do with your life is to read the New YorkTimes obituary column every day, to see what people have done with theirlives. They might be an example for you.” It was good stuff, but it wasn’twhat Harvard Business School was—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why is he so renowned, so remembered? Bowes: Well, he had quite a career. He was a general in the army, in our army. Hewas a Frenchman who’d come to this country and succeeded, and he was,some say, the first venture capitalist.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you agree with that label? Bowes: He was certainly one of the first. He might have been the first to start a formalventure capital firm as opposed to somebody like a Rockefeller who would doventure capital investing for his own account. He might have been the first totake outside money and go about it in that way, which set a model for all ofus.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Had he done that all when you appeared on the scene? I forget the dates. Bowes: I think he had. At least he was getting it started. I forget his career dates. Inever paid that much attention. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: The company—American Research— Bowes: And Development.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Development—was that around when you were in school? Bowes: That’s what I can’t remember. I suspect so, I suspect so.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, that’s easy to find out. [note: founded in 1946] Bowes: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did any of this resonate years later? Was there anything there that might haveguided you in what was to come? Bowes: Nothing direct. It all became useful background, I guess, but I didn’t take anyparticular lesson and apply it later. I just got sort of a general—Harvard’stheme is to create an important business person. They don’t try to make you agreat accountant or a great marketier. They want you to be a successfulbusinessman and a good person and a credit to the profession, and so forth.Specific lessons, I didn’t carry much of those. I just came out feeling goodabout myself and ready to ramble. [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you were hooked. Or had you been hooked already? Were you pretty surewhen you entered that business was going to be the career? Bowes: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. Bowes: I couldn’t think of anything else. [chuckling] I mean—it wasn’t going to bescience or medicine.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, you’d eliminated medicine, right. I’m thinking of the connections ofwhich there seem to be so many in what then became the pioneering group ofventure capitalists on the West Coast. Were there any connections made atHarvard that then you would play upon—or maybe that’s not the nicest terminology. Were there personal associations that you then continued in yourfuture career? Bowes: Really just one, with Pitch [Franklin] Johnson. We were classmates.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you. I’d forgotten that. Bowes: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And you became friends at that stage? Bowes: Absolutely. We became pals and we’ve had some interaction the rest of ourlives, including co-investing.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Really, which you talked about at that stage? Bowes: No, no, no. I didn’t have any idea what I was going to do and neither did he.He took a job with Inland Steel Company, which had nothing to do withventure capital or anything else. He just got that job. His father had workedfor a steel company.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: His father-in-law. Bowes: No, his father.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was it? Bowes: His father-in-law was an oilman.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, that’s right. Bowes: His father worked for Kaiser Steel, and I guess he’d grown up a bit in thatmilieu, so he went to work for a steel company for a while and he lived inIndiana. Bill Draper worked for the same company.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That’s right.  Bowes: But I went straight back out to California.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Had you always planned to return to the West Coast? Bowes: Yes. If somebody had offered me a fab job in Boston or New York, out of theblue, I might have thought about that, but nobody did. So I just drove west. I took about eight months off after I graduated. I had a year at Stanford, threeyears in the service, three years at Stanford, two years at Harvard. I just felt Ineeded a break, and so I took a break. I didn’t even look for a job for sixmonths. It drove my parents crazy! [laughter] I hung in there. I lived at homeand learned how to play golf and did some traveling up and down the coastand just fiddled. I went looking for a job on the first of the year in ’53. So Ifound a job.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you thinking about the next step during that period? Or was it allserendipity? Bowes: It was serendipitous. I was looking for a job and I got offered jobs that Idecided I didn’t want. Then I got offered a job I did want, and they retractedthe offer—and then they retracted the retraction.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And why? Why were you having second thoughts? Bowes: Oh I wasn’t having second thoughts. They offered me the job, and then theson of an important client of the firm said he wanted the job, so they decidedto give it to him because my father was not an important client. Then theydecided that was a bad idea. After he had a month on the job he decided hewould rather work with his father. So they got back, offered it to me and Isaid, “Sure.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And is that Blyth Eastman? Bowes: Blyth and Company.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What’s the relationship between Blyth and Company and Blyth Eastman? Bowes: That was a merger about twenty years later. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh I see. Bowes: They were two separate firms. Eastman Dillon was pretty much a New Yorkfirm, and Blyth was a New York-San Francisco firm. It started in SanFrancisco. It was a great place. It was a small, high-quality investmentbanking firm which had terrific clients. We certainly worked with great peopleand great personnel. It was a fantastic place to work. I couldn’t have enjoyedit more, for at least the first twenty years, and then times changed. I was doing fine. I was vice president and director and all that stuff, but thefounders of the firm, the big guys in the firm decided the time had come tocash in—retire and cash in. So they found a big insurance company thatwanted to buy Blyth and they sold it. It wasn’t as much fun after that. Theinsurance company decided they didn’t like the business after all, so they soldus again and then we were sold again the third time. That’s when I left.Twenty-five years.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Wow. Tell me what you were doing during that period. I know it has to be anoutline, but it must be somehow related to what came next. Bowes: Well, it was finance. It was finance and financing. It was in mergers andinitial public offerings and consulting to your clients and what their strategieswould be, should be. We had clients like the Bank of America and Chevron,PG&E, Hewlett-Packard. We were a premier investment banking firm up anddown the coast. Just as a part of looking for business for the firm, I wasspending quite a bit of time in Silicon Valley, starting in about 1955 or so.Pretty early, and I took Hewlett-Packard public in the late fifties.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you. Bowes: That was the best firm down there. A real look up to firm. I got to know quitea few people that were in the companies {words unclear}, and I got to knowsome venture capitalists and poked around and got to know people. This wasprobably starting in about ’55 and been going on for a good twenty years. Ihad a lot of close, but not intimate relationships with a lot of people down inSilicon Valley. It seemed like it was going to be an interesting—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: In the companies. Bowes: In the companies, yes. Then a friend of mine, actually a classmate of minefrom Harvard, got a job with a startup company, and he suggested it wasgoing to be a good company, so I invested in it. Not much. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: This was a Silicon Valley startup? Bowes: Yes, called Raychem. I went on the board of that company, and so that gaveme more reason to be down in the valley. I made friends with Bill Draper andother people. I could see the beginnings of something happening down here.Before venture capital was institutionalized down there, there were someindividual practitioners who happened to be friends of mine. They wereolder—one of them was named Ed Heller. He would make individualinvestments, and one was named Joe McMicking and he would makeindividual investments. These were their own funds. Ed Heller—he was afunny guy. He refused to make an investment decision until the afternoon,because he thought he had better judgment after a couple of drinks at lunch.[laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: He may have been right! Bowes: He may have been right. We’ll never know. But he made some good bets.Don’t ask me the year, but along in there somewhere, Bill Draper’s father anda couple of his buddies formed a venture capital firm called Draper, Gaither &Anderson. They had zero experience in venture capital, zero experience withsmall companies.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I958-1959 I think it was. Bowes: Was that when it was?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. Bowes: I think it was in there somewhere. Bill Draper’s father was kind of a classicmilitary-industrial complex kind of a guy. In and out of the halls of power.Gaither was—he had been president of the Ford Foundation, and Andersonwas a retired air force general. Not a likely group, but they started a firm and Igot friendly with those guys and so they, every six months, or every threemonths they asked me to come down and evaluate their portfolio, so I did that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] Now was your “in” your friendship with young Bill Draper? Bowes: No.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Or just because you were in the technology investment sector.  Bowes: Yes, yes. Bill Draper went to work there a bit later.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right, yes. Bowes: That firm did terribly.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did it? Bowes: Because I had to report them on their performance. They didn’t know whatthey were doing.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did they call themselves venture capitalists? Bowes: Sure, it sounded good. [<|endoftext|>
Interviewer laughs] So Bill Draper left and went intobusiness with Pitch—Draper and Johnson—and they got along fine, except ina business way and decided to split, still buddies.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because they saw business from a different perspective? Or why? Bowes: No. They’re both terrific venture capitalists, but Bill Draper is very intuitiveand Pitch is very fact oriented. Draper was too impatient to wait for Pitch, andPitch couldn’t stand these early decisions that Draper wanted to make,because the facts weren’t in yet. So they just couldn’t get along professionallybut stayed buddies.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you aware of this at the time? Or is this all after the fact? Bowes: Oh yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now were you beginning to perk up your ears about this thing called venturecapital? Bowes: No. I was too happy with what I was doing. So Bill Draper founded SutterHill and Pitch did Asset Management and they both did fine. Another firmthat started up along about that same time, maybe a little later, was Davis &Rock. Tommy [Thomas J.] Davis, [Jr.] and Arthur Rock. Arthur Rock wasahead of me in business school. I didn’t know him, but— <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you know Tommy Davis? Bowes: Yes, I did. They had a great success and then they, for some reason not knownto me, they split. In my investment banking capacity, I raised some money forTommy Davis to start a new fund called Mayfield. Which is now still with us.It’s got a long history of success. I worked for six months to raise that moneyfor Tommy and came up with $3.5 million which seemed like a lot, but inthese days, that’s one investment, so times have changed.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Where and how were you raising this money? Because this was early on. Bowes: I was calling on Stanford and calling on Berkeley and calling on institutionswith money and trying to get them to write a little check.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And were they receptive? Bowes: It was hard. It was hard. It was pretty early. Tommy was a hell of a nice guy,but he didn’t come across as being an aggressive money maker the wayArthur Rock did, so it was a bit of a problem, but we did it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How did you come across? Bowes: How did I come across?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. Bowes: Well, I don’t know—probably not as forceful as I could have been, because Ididn’t know if he was going to make it or not. I liked Tommy a lot. Anyway,we got the money together and went into business and they’re probably onfund twelve or something, now, but half a million dollars at a crack, so—butyou’ve got to start somewhere. [sound of cannons firing in background]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is that part of the regatta [on San Francisco Bay]? Bowes: Yes. They’ve been shooting cannons off.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You said you liked what you were doing. What was it that grabbed youparticularly?  Bowes: Oh just—investment banking was kind of a consulting job. You’re consultingwith companies about their financial strategy, you’re helping them raisemoney and which is the best way to raise the money. You’re helping them ifthey see a company they want to buy, helping them get that done. If they wantto sell themselves you help them get that done. It’s a very interesting kind ofbusiness with all kinds of life experiences, and it was—in those days thereweren’t that many people doing it, so you felt kind of like a little exclusiveclub. It was a great firm, so we had opportunities to consult with all kinds ofcorporate people up and down the coast. Sold the Folger[s] company toProcter & Gamble—Folger[s] Coffee. We did the first Ford Motor Companypublic offering. All kinds of stuff. But after the sale of the company andanother sale of the company, another sale of the company, it got to be a lotless fun, so I quit. I just quit in ‘78.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. But before that happened, while you were still having fun, how much areyou flying by the seat of your pants and how much of it is based on what youhad learned? Well, first—and I didn’t ask questions about this—I know your undergraduatedegree is in economics and then, of course, we’ve talked about the HarvardBusiness School. How well is that preparing you for what’s to come, and howmuch of it do you just have to pick up as you’re going along? Bowes: I think you have to pick up 99 percent as you go along. I started out atStanford in chemical engineering. When I got back to Stanford after threeyears in the service, my brain was mush. I could no more do chemicalengineering than fly to the moon, so I switched to economics. [laughter] Easy.I deserved some fun at Stanford after three years in the infantry.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And was the major practically oriented? Bowes: No, completely not.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It was very theoretical? Bowes: Very theoretical, and bad theories.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [laughing] Bad theories. So you left all that behind.  Bowes: Oh boy. Essentially I took the minimum required courses in economics to getby, sort of a gentleman’s B-minus, and did everything else that was availableat Stanford—all the electives that you could possibly do. That’s where the joyof Stanford came into play.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, yes. Good strategy. Bowes: At Harvard, the courses were pretty well laid out for you. You didn’t have alot of—the first year you had absolutely no choice. You took every coursethey prescribed for you. The second, of course you had a little choice, but nota whole lot. So you couldn’t really focus on something except take the wholecourse and be a generally better-prepared person when you left than when youarrived, but nothing specific, nothing specific. We had guys—there were no women then—we had guys—there are now—wehad guys go to work for Macy’s because they wanted to do retail. We hadguys go to work for Procter & Gamble; they wanted to do consumer goods.We had guys go to work for McKinsey; they wanted to do consulting. We hadguys go to Wall Street; we had guys go back to their family company.Everybody was supposed to be better prepared for this by virtue of those twoyears than they would have been otherwise, and I’m sure we were. Nothingspecific. They kind of pride themselves on that—Harvard.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And still do? Bowes: Still do. Problem solving is their mantra.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: A pretty good one, don’t you think? [a siren in the background] All right. Bowes: Next year is their hundredth anniversary.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is that so? Bowes: Oh—this year, this year.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Are you going to celebrate? Bowes: I’m going to go back. I’m on the visiting committee there. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh are you? What does that mean? Bowes: That’s a committee that goes back there once a year and gets up to date onwhat’s happening at the school. We comment back to them what we thinkthey’re missing and what we think they’re doing well, sort of interactive.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Does anybody listen to you? Bowes: Well, we write a report and they’re supposed to read it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] All right. So with all these acquisitions you—the climate ischanging in your world of investment banking, right? And this must be 1978,because that’s when you leave. So what do you think you’re going to do whenyou leave twenty-five years of investment banking? Bowes: I thought I would do some venture capital.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, well, you know there’s something that comes before this that I wouldlike you to talk about actually, and that’s Cetus, because my notes say that youjoin the board of Cetus in 1972 and you left in 1978, so you were leaving a lotof things in 1978. Bowes: Yes, well, I guess I was on the Raychem board. I was on the Cetus board.They asked me to come on the board, and I thought biotechnology was reallyinteresting. The reason I left Cetus was that I came to believe that they wereapproaching biotech the wrong way. I thought they didn’t have enoughemphasis on the science and too much on the promotion.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you attribute that largely to the two people at the head of Cetus? Bowes: Sure, sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you say so? I mean, you were on the board. Bowes: Yes, I said so and it didn’t take—so there. It was a five-year process.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [laughter] I have a feeling that you’re condensing quite a bit of information.Well, I know because I talked to him—  Bowes: Who?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Moshe Alafi was associated with Cetus early on. In fact, even earlier thanyou—no maybe not. Bowes: He was a founder.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, he was a founder. So how did you get there? Had you known Moshe? Bowes: Moshe and one of my many bosses were friends. Moshe, I think, asked forhelp in getting an outside director to come on over, and so my boss said,“Why don’t you do that?”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And was that just pro forma? Or was it because Moshe thought that there weresome problems? Bowes: I don’t know if he thought there were problems at that time, but he thoughthe’d just like another head around the table. He might have felt uneasy abouthis partners. He should have. But they asked a big-time scientist fromBerkeley on the board, and this is what I mean—a big time scientist fromBerkeley—no biology background. Pure physics. So what’s he going to do?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, that’s Don [Donald A.] Glaser, right? Bowes: Nice guy, but he didn’t belong on a biotech board. He was just windowdressing.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, well—except that he had that scanner of his which Cetus put a lot ofattention on in those early days. Bowes: That was one of the things I didn’t—nothing to do with therapies.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, was that indeed what Cetus, at that point, had set out to do? To become,essentially, a pharmaceutical company? Bowes: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: In those early days?  Bowes: Yes, that’s what all the startup biotechs had decided they wanted to be. Theywanted to be biopharmaceutical companies. They wanted to make drugs andcure people with a brand new technology.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, you know, it’s really kind of an amazing story, because Stan [StanleyN.] Cohen was on the scientific board early on—he becomes a consultant in1975. It seems to me that Cetus, above any other firm—and there weren’t anyothers at that point doing what we now call biotech—had a golden opportunityto leap early into the commercialization of recombinant DNA. Bowes: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that anything that interested you? And do you remember anydiscussions? Bowes: Oh it interested me a lot, and I didn’t think they were going about doing thatin the right way. That’s why I left.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, say a little more about that. What were they doing wrong? Bowes: Well, I think if you’re going to get into a brand new technology or a brandnew science, whatever you want to call it, you’ve got to engage with superscientists. I don’t mean on your board, I mean working in the company. Imean that’s what you do. You get super scientists to work with and they dothe necessary—and just saying we’re going to be a biopharmaceuticalcompany, aren’t we wonderful, doesn’t really cut it. Cetus, to their credit, theystayed alive, they raised a lot of money. They bought a couple of interestingproperties, and then they got taken over by whoever they got taken over by.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Chiron. Bowes: Chiron. That’s right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But that was later. That was 1991, I think, or ’90 if I remember. Bowes: They had one genius scientist at Cetus who developed the PCR [polymerasechain reaction] technology and that’s really what Chiron wanted. There wasnothing therapeutic coming out of Cetus. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And was that what you were pushing? You were trying to direct them towardstherapeutics? Bowes: Oh you know, those were early days, and you were hoping that therapeuticswould evolve out of all this. My problem was they didn’t have enoughemphasis on hiring excellent scientists to do interesting work. They were justdoing everything else but that. And so I just—I kind of threw up my hands.I’d been critical of the management. They were glad I left. [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I don’t think you were the only one that was critical, either. Bowes: They had forced Moshe out long before that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, yes. Did you have interactions with Stan Cohen? Who after all was, withHerb Boyer, Mr. Recombinant DNA. Bowes: I had interactions with Stan Cohen later, but not during that time.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Not during that period, yes. All right. Was it Cetus that sparked your interestin biotechnology? Bowes: [pause before answering] It was a combination of Cetus and Genentech.Genentech was doing it right and Cetus was doing it wrong.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. And you were quite aware of that at the time? I mean, now we knowthat’s true. Bowes: Well, within six months of Genentech being founded, I figured they weredoing it the right way.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How did you know? Bowes: I knew the names of the scientists they’d hired. They had great resumes. Theyweren’t spending money on peripheral stuff. It was all science.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, well, and also, Swanson was very focused. Bowes: Yes. On that. 20<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes—now does that— Bowes: Herb Boyer worked in the company. He wasn’t just an advisor. He had hissleeves rolled up.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you know him at that point? Bowes: Oh I was acquainted. I didn’t know him.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, yes. And I know we’re jumping ahead, because I’m thinking ofAmgen—which doesn’t come along until 1981? Or was it 1980—1980 Iguess. Bowes: Seventy-nine.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Really, when you began to talk about it. But before we get quite there, I’mwondering if Genentech is a model that you have in mind when you dobecome associated with Amgen. Bowes: [pause] Not consciously. Not consciously, because these small biotechcompanies are extremely secretive about what they’re doing, and you don’tknow much unless you’re on the inside, and I wasn’t—just as a friendlyacquaintance. So I suspected they were doing things right, but I didn’t knowfor a fact. I didn’t know enough about what they were doing to copy them. Ijust knew they were hiring terrific, terrific people.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, well, another thing you must have known too, because it was so wellpublicized, was their spectacular IPO. Isn’t that some indication that they’redoing things right? Bowes: Sure. When was that?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: 1980. Bowes: 1980. Yes, that was encouraging, because I’d actually started to work onAmgen in ’79. Just conceptually, so it was nice to have a kind of a publicvalidation of science being important in the public market. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Had your ears perked up by then? Were you following—maybe it was only inthe newspapers. But this budding industry, this application of basic biologicalscience in these cases with the idea—well, not always, but often, to maketherapeutics, to make drugs. Bowes: Yes, well, sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So that was in your consciousness, along with everything else. Bowes: Oh sure—we had Biogen in Boston and lots of little sprouts. There were quitea few budding biotech companies. A lot of them didn’t make it. There was lotsof activity going on in San Diego and the Bay Area and Boston, for sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Biogen was another one with an interesting business model in those earlydays, with people scattered all over Europe. Bowes: Yes, they were in Switzerland. That’s right, they had two headquarters.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, they also had key scientists in Scotland and there was [Walter H.]Gilbert at Harvard. Bowes: Gilbert was more important though than the Scottish guys. [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So this was becoming an interest, in other words. Bowes: Oh sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Before Amgen had really gotten off the ground? Bowes: Oh sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes—well, I think we’re there. We’re at Amgen, and you said 1979 you beginto talk about it. So tell me that story, please. Bowes: [pause] Well, the story, I guess, is fairly simple. The story is that there were alot of superb scientists who were not associated with any biotech company, soI thought there was room for another good one down south, as opposed to theBay Area. So I went to—I thought the first step would be to put together a scientific advisory board, who could point [us in] promising directions, andit’d also be a help in attracting good management to the company. So I wentdown to Stanford and talked to a guy named, a biology professor named[Robert T.] Bob Schimke. He said he thought that it was a great idea, but hewas going to stay fully academic.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That’s interesting, because as you probably were quite aware, it was notexactly the done thing that professors, biology professors, form companies atthat time. Bowes: Well, that’s right. What I was asking Bob to do was not to form a company,but to put together an all star set of scientific advisors for a company. Hedidn’t want to do that, but he pointed me to a guy down at UCLA who he saidwould do that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why do you think he didn’t want to do it? Bowes: He was immersed in some recently interesting scientific project in his lab. Hedidn’t want to be diverted. Anyway—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I don’t know much about him, but the one thing that seems to berelevant to what we’re talking about is the fact that he had a way ofmultiplying genes—I’m putting it probably not at all in scientific terms—butthe end result was that more protein could be expressed. Was that what he wasonto at that point? Because that, of course, becomes important when you’retrying to commercialize the science. Bowes: Well, there were a lot of scientists who were kind of in that game. All I’mtelling you is he didn’t want to be involved in anything commercial at thatmoment in time. He later came on the Amgen scientific advisory board, butthat was maybe two years later. So he sent me to a guy down in UCLA namedWinston Salser, who wanted to do this. He went to work and rounded up ascientific advisory board. We would meet, and people would fly in or drive inand we’d meet. This went on fall of ’79 on into the spring of ’80, and we got itput together. Along the way there, I’d enlisted Pitch to be my partner in theenterprise and—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now was that the first time the two of you had actually done businesstogether?  Bowes: [pause] I forget, but it was fairly early. There had been three or four situationsand I don’t remember the precise timing. So we decided to put the company inThousand Oaks, California.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why there? Bowes: There were three reasons actually. One was that it was equidistant from ourmain scientific advisors—UCLA, Caltech, and UC Santa Barbara, which wasequally painful for all of them. It was right there in the middle. The secondone was that the living was very cheap—perfect for young scientists, postdocs, and also, there was very nice living in Santa Barbara, Ventura—seniorexecutives could enjoy, so a nice combination. The third was it was in thenon-smog belt. The fog came in at night there, from the sea, and that’simportant to young scientists. They don’t want to work in L.A. They don’twant to work in Athens. They want to work in San Francisco or ThousandOaks. And then we set about to find a chief executive, which took a while, butwe found George [Rathmann] and—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So Salser was never going to be a CEO? Bowes: He wanted to be, but we disabused him of that notion. Then he wanted to bechief scientist and he wanted to be head of research and we disabused him ofthat. We’d come to realize that as energetic as he is and as well spoken as heis, he’s not a scientist who was greatly respected by the other scientists, sothere was no way you could be a leader of a group of scientists. So he had tobe told the facts of life and he went back to his lab with some stock.[chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Are you adept at doing that sort of thing? Bowes: I’m not crazy about it, but I can do it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, you’ve had to do it, haven’t you? Bowes: Oh yes. That’s the venture capital business, and people that had a nice run butthe job has now gone on to be too big for them—.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Let’s stop there. Julie needs to change the tape.[End Audio File 1] <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Where does Sam [Samuel J.] Wohlstadter fit into this story? Bowes: Sam and I teamed up to call on Bob Schimke at Stanford. He thought it was agood idea to start a biotech company too—a fairly promotional guy, and Isaid, “Okay, let’s do it together.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Had you known him? Bowes: Oh for about a year, I guess. I’d say that Sam was not helpful during theprocess of putting the whole thing together, in that he was extremelypromotional and extremely [pause] greedy. [laughter] He wasn’t the rightperson to try to get some scientists to work together and do things. He just wasvery bombastic, so we just had to disassociate fairly early in the process. Hedidn’t like that, but—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did Pitch then come into the picture because of that? Bowes: No, no. Pitch was already in the picture.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Pitch was in it. I see. Bowes: We had to team up on Sam.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It sounds to me as though you’re pretty much—you not only had the conceptfor this company—but is it fair to say at this early stage that you’re prettymuch running the show? Bowes: My title was chairman and treasurer [chuckling].<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Okay. That’s a pretty good combination! Bowes: That’s what they do in New England. I’d say by that time Pitch and I weredoing it together. We were partners.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And you two did see eye to eye most of the time on how things should be?  Bowes: Yes. We teamed up on recruiting the chief executive officer that we needed.In fact, we did our final sales pitch to George in Pitch’s back yard in PaloAlto, on a beautiful July evening. Come on out from Chicago and here we arein California.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Not bad, eh? Right. Now you had contrasted Bill Draper and Pitch in thebasics of how they go about venture capital, because you just said that youand Pitch see things more or less in the same light. Does that mean that youtoo have a more fact-based way of going about venture capital than intuitive? Bowes: I suppose. I’m pretty intuitive about people, but I like more than just a smile. Isee something that hangs together, so Pitch and I get along fine in that sense.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Say some more about George Rathmann. Bowes: Well, George had had a big job at 3M Minneapolis and then he’d gone toAbbott Laboratories in Chicago. He was tapped—he was a chemist—and hehad become head of research and development for the diagnostic part ofAbbott and he had gotten interested in biotechnology. The reason we’d foundhim was that he had taken a six-month leave of absence from Abbott to go outto UCLA and piddle around in the labs there. Winston Salser had noticed himand thought he was a likely prospect. So then when Winston suggested him,even though we didn’t give it much credit because it came from Winston,[laughter] when we met George we were sold. We started to work on Georgein spring of ’80 and sold him in July, and he went to work in AugustSeptember and the rest is history. He’s probably the best startup CEO I’veever met.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Really, really. Bowes: He started with nothing. Scientific advisory board living other places over atother jobs. He’s got his scientific advisors to advise him, but he built thecompany from scratch. It’s not that easy. To hire people, to convince people tocome—employees number two, three, and four—that’s kind of lonely. ButGeorge is—we called him “The Golden Throat.” He could talk anybody intoanything.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, but it was more than talk. Bowes: Oh yes. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How would you describe his abilities as a CEO? What was there there thatmade him almost an idolized manager—or I don’t know why I say almost, heis an idolized CEO. Bowes: He was very smart. He was tireless. He was extremely persuasive in the rightway, and he would reason with you until you understood. He didn’t bowl youover, he just sat down—“Let’s talk about this. It doesn’t matter how long ittakes. We’ll do it until we’re on the same page.” His people would just walkthrough walls for him. You’ve never seen more loyalty to a man. And he was good at raising money. Biotech companies eat a lot of moneybefore they get anywhere and he was good at getting money from corporatepartners. He was good at persuading investors to write checks. So he was theall-around guy. He had no weakness. The only weakness he had was he didn’twant to be part of a big company. So when Amgen got to be big, he didn’twant to be there anymore. Too much unimportant stuff. Meetings—less oneon-ones and more meetings, et cetera, et cetera.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you try to persuade him out of leaving? Bowes: No. He wasn’t going to be persuaded. He made up his mind; he announced itto the board and that was it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did that worry you? He was so much Amgen. Bowes: Oh sure. We didn’t like that at all! [chuckling] But we found the next guy andit worked out fine.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: He—I’m trying to think of those. The very early CEOs—and isn’t he the onlyone that had the scientific background but also had some business andadministrative experience? I mean, Genentech had that in two people, but I’mtrying to think of another early figure in biotech that had both thosebackgrounds. Bowes: Well, I don’t know that—probably not. You’re probably right. I don’t knowfor sure. I wasn’t on the team with some of the other biotechs. I wasn’tfollowing Biogen and how they were managed.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That was a bunch of scientists in the beginning.  Bowes: I’m sure it was.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You have a building named after you at Amgen. Bowes: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How do you feel about that? Bowes: It feels great.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that a surprise? Or did you know it was coming. Bowes: It was a surprise. I have a statue, too.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: A statue, too. Are you running like Pitch? Bowes: No, I’m contemplating my navel or something. [laughter] I can show you alittle copy of it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, I’d like to see it. Bowes: We can put it right there! [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, you know, what’s happening around this time is you’re doing—you’renot just sitting on your laurels thinking and doing Amgen, you’re alsofounding USVP, U.S. Venture Partners. [brief pause in recording] All right.USVP, which was founded, as you know, in 1981. Bowes: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why did that come about? How did that come about? Bowes: Well, in ’78 I decided I wanted to go into venture capital, and I was doing itan unusual way. I was finding situations that I thought were worth doing, likeAmgen, and I was rounding up the money from various sources—venturecapitalists and so forth. I was doing it out of an office here in the Bank ofAmerica building, and it was interesting and fun, but it was a bit far from Silicon Valley and it was a bit lonely. I was all by myself. So I thought aboutstarting a firm and luckily found two other guys who also wanted to go intoventure capital. So we decided to form up a partnership and do it, and wedecided that in, probably 1981 early. We drew up the papers and got intobusiness in say, June or July of ’81 and started looking for money.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. Who were the other two? Bowes: One was a guy named Stuart [G.] Moldaw, who just died, who was a retailguru. That was going to be one of our arms, and then Bob [Robert] Sackmanwas the technology guru. He’d been number two at Ampex, and he’s sincedied also. So we were—it was 1980, we were all in our fifties, sort of a secondcareer for all of us. So we found some cheap space in Menlo Park and startedlooking for money and found some money and got into real business early in1982. It took us about eight months to round up the money—went all over thecountry looking for money [chuckling].<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. So were you all reeling in your previous connections? Or making newones. Bowes: Making new ones.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Really. Give me an example of how you went about that. Bowes: Well, we essentially said we were all very experienced people. I mean, StuMoldaw had documented success in the retail business and Bob Sackman’sbeen a technology leader in Silicon Valley and I’ve put together two or threecompanies already just all by myself, so I guess I know what I’m doing. Wemake a good team, so why don’t you believe in us and write us a check? Thatwas hard work. We finally got a couple—we got two breaks. We got GeneralElectric pension fund to take a chance with us and we got Allstate to take achance with us. That made it a lot easier.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now had they done investments of that type before? High-risk investments? Bowes: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: They had.  Bowes: Yes, in fact Allstate had its own department for doing that. They decided theymight like to see how their department compared to somebody else that wason the ground in Silicon Valley and not working out of Chicago. I think theydid it to compare us to their own show, and about four years later they closedup their own operation. [chuckling] So we got in business, and last month wedid our tenth fund, in June of this year, so it’s been pretty steady. We’re a lotbigger now than we were then, although I’m not there anymore.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You’re not at all? Bowes: Oh sure, oh sure, sure. I just don’t do the—I don’t do deals.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What do you do then if you’re not doing deals? Bowes: Well, I give advice. [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And I imagine people listen! Bowes: Sometimes, yes. Sometimes they fight back. So we have partners meetings onMondays, and tomorrow we’re having an all-day strategy meeting down inMenlo Park and the same thing on Saturday.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What is this operation here in San Francisco? Bowes: This is my San Francisco office. A place to hang my hat. I don’t have to godown to Silicon Valley five days a week anymore.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. Because you live here. I see, I see. Well, you were characterizing yourtwo original partners as being gurus in diverse areas. Did you think of yourselfas being a guru in any particular line? Bowes: No. I claimed I would take on the medical investing side.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh that seems fair enough. Bowes: They didn’t want it, and I’ve always been interested in things medical.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, because of your mother? 30 Bowes: Well, I suppose. So I stuck to that with some exceptions, and we did a lot ofretail deals in those days. Our first fund was remarkably successful, whichgives you the impetus to do a second fund, et cetera, et cetera. But we becamea first-tier firm in Silicon Valley, even though we were late to the game—’81.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, particularly if you count Draper, Gaither & Anderson way back in 1958. Bowes: Well, yes, but—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You don’t count them? Bowes: No. There were lots of good firms formed up in the seventies. Like theMayfield Fund, which I helped fund, was 1973 or 1974, and so you had, therewere—I don’t know how many—there were probably twenty-five reallypretty good firms around.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, you know, we skated over, and it’s such a complicated history that it’ssort of hard to summarize it, but I’m thinking of Silicon Valley and thattremendous growth of technology, pre-biotech, which you were very muchpart of. I don’t know quite how to phrase this question, but it’s sort of achicken and egg question in a way. The technology is there and you’rebeginning to develop an infrastructure and an area where this technology ishappening, and a culture is growing up around it. Say something—it’s not avery coherent question I’m asking, but I’m trying to fit the growth of venturecapital into this phenomenon of Silicon Valley which is happening as you’removing along closer and closer to venture capital. Bowes: Well, I guess it really started with Dave Packard and Bill [William R.]Hewlett, Stanford engineers with an idea. Their professor is often called thefather of Silicon Valley, Fred [Frederick E.] Terman. Packard and Hewlettwere such exemplary citizens that they kind of set an example for what youcould, or how you could start a company and have it grow and prosper.Stanford was interested in that because it would—their engineeringdepartment would be much more interesting if it had real world experience togo with its academic credentials. So people took notice of Hewlett andPackard and they started—yes, that can happen. You can build a companyfrom nothing. And then a few people did. There were other companies downthere that started. Raychem was a decent example.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, you mention that several times. Should we talk about Raychem?  Bowes: Well, no. It’s out of the mainstream. It was a chemical company as opposed toinformation technology, as opposed to a chip company or a softwarecompany. These things happen organically. One thing leads to another. It’shard to say where the watershed events are. Venture capitalists look forinteresting opportunities. Entrepreneurs hear money is available so they try toput together a team to do something earth shaking, and it just can’t happenquickly. It happens over a long period of time and there’s no magic moment,but it kept happening and kept growing and you do end up with aninfrastructure. Silicon Valley has its own kinds of lawyers, kinds of law firms.All they do is high tech. They have their own kinds of management recruitingfirms that know how to look for a great software engineer and they knowwhere these people are and who’s restless. It’s a real infrastructure. Plus theventure capitalists and the money and the networking—and Stanford’s a bigpart of it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. How much do you buy into the more ephemeral parts of thisinfrastructure? I’m thinking of culture—in quotes—the supposed tolerance forrisk and— Bowes: Yes, it’s a big part.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is that a real phenomenon? Bowes: Oh yes. I mean—don’t be afraid to fail. You can still have a career after youfail, unlike other countries. You’re not disgraced—you just learned a lessonthat you’re going to apply next time.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Would you say that that’s unique to Silicon Valley? Bowes: I think it’s unique to Silicon Valley and other areas like Silicon Valley aroundthis country.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Any elsewhere? Bowes: Well, you see biotech startups in Boston and San Diego. You’ll see electronicstartups in Boston and Austin, Texas and somewhat Orange County, so thereare spots of this and they’re all not risk averse—that expect a certainproportion of your initiatives to fail. It just has to happen. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. I’m imagining that this was not the sort of thing that you were beingtaught at Harvard Business School. Bowes: You are now.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, oh I bet they are now—but that must have been a radical shift in businessmodels for you. Bowes: Oh sure, sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And everybody else that was involved. Bowes: I think the word entrepreneurship is a buzzword now. It’s deemed veryimportant to this country. Innovation and entrepreneurship are whatdifferentiate us from every place else in the world. That’s our story and we’llstick with it. And I think it’s right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you? Why? Bowes: Because look at your best Indian entrepreneurs. They’re in Silicon Valley,they’re not in India. The best. They know that they can prosper here. Theydon’t have to go for thirty-seven approvals to start a business—just get alawyer and you’re on your way. And so—it feeds on itself. Silicon Valley isfull of Chinese entrepreneurs. One of my partners is Chinese. He couldn’t dothat in China—maybe in five years. They’re getting the idea over there.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. And is it mainly because the governmental structure is cumbersome? Oris it more—or as well, maybe is the way to put it, how people look atbusiness—again getting back to this more ephemeral culture idea of startupsand risk and making a go for it. Bowes: Well, in other countries it’s awfully hard to raise money for a high-riskstartup. Where do you go to raise the money?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Where do you go? Bowes: Good question. [laughter] No place to go. If your family doesn’t have it, youaren’t going to get it. And so it kind of stays in the family. So there’s a very strong culture in Silicon Valley that has been unique for a long time, and it’sprobably going to get less unique, but not very fast. The valley goes through, the venture capital part, goes through hard times.Turn of the century was a tough time for venture capitalists. They lost a lot ofmoney. Lots of newly formed firms had to quit because they couldn’t raisetheir second fund.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What about right now with the economic downturn? Bowes: Yes. [pause] There are two things about that. One is that when you’re startinga company, and we’re all early stagers, you have to take a long view. Youknow you’re not going to get rewarded for five years. That’s a goodsituation—five years is just wonderful. So the present situation doesn’t reallyplay much to that. Where it plays right now is your good companies in yourstable can’t go public right now, so if you’re going to realize on thosecompanies you have to sell them to a big guy, which you kind of hate to do,it’s not really what we’re in business for, but you don’t have any choice,because your investors are your bosses. You’re working for them, so peoplearen’t able right now to realize the fruits of their last five or ten years of labor.Hopefully that’ll come to an end one of these days. But we’re all optimists,and looking ahead five or ten years. It’s not going to be like this, it’s going tobe fine again and we’ll have our IPOs. And everybody will be very—sunshineon the meadow. [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you’re optimistic. Bowes: Oh sure. Everybody in this business is optimistic.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. Well, maybe we should stop there and then we’ll pick up next time. Ithink there’s much more to say about U.S. Venture Partners.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, we left off last time—we had just talked about the founding of USVPand then we kind of got diverted into other things. So I thought today we’dbegin by picking up USVP again, not only to get that history down but also asa way of looking at your mode of doing venture capital. Does that soundgood? Bowes: Okay. [chuckling] So where were we? <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, let me pick up on something that you said last time. You said, as anintroduction to the foundation of USVP, that you had been doing venturecapital in an unusual way prior to that time, by finding situations that youthought were worth doing and— Bowes: And raising the money from other people.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right. Well, you didn’t say that, but that was what—and so that’s what youmeant, because that was going to be my question, why unusual and was thatwhat made it unusual? Bowes: Yes, most venture capitalists, when they find an attractive situation, write acheck, and I didn’t have any checks to write. [laughter] So I had to go findpeople who might be interested in the situation, so go to five or eight ortwelve people and find three or four that were interested. To get the companyfinanced that way was not as satisfactory for the company, because it tooklonger. But sometimes they didn’t have any particular alternative, so theywaited for me to do my best—and it always worked out. I always did find themoney, and your reputation gets around as being able to perform and theydon’t have to worry so much about wasting all that time. But it got a little bitlonely, and I was here in the Bank of America building, which is forty milesfrom the action down in Silicon Valley, so the distance was a handicap. So Idecided to form a venture firm.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, well, you still had to raise the money. Bowes: Well, you can’t form a firm unless you have partners, so I got together with acouple of other guys who wanted to form a venture firm and we formed up.We did the legal papers and became a partnership and started to look forfunding. And that was in June, July of—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: 1981. Bowes: ’81. It took a long time because institutional investors aren’t eager to be thefirst ones to finance a new group. They like to go with proven entities, and soit took us until the following January, February, March, which is a good ninemonths, to get our necessary funding together.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And was it all from institutions?  Bowes: Not all, but the bulk of it was. The bulk of it was. We got a huge—we had twohuge breaks in late fall—General Electric pension fund and Allstate InsuranceCompany decided to take a flier with us. That made it easier, because theywere big names and they had lots of venture capital firms in their stable, andso their blessing meant a lot.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, was it your name that validated USVP? Bowes: No, I think it was the three of us. One of my partners was a noted retailer, andwe were going to have retail as one of our initiatives, and then the otherfellow, Bob Sackman, was a well-known technologist. So he was going to dotechnology and I was going to do medical and off we go.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, when you say a technologist you mean that he had been financingtechnology or was he from a tech company? Bowes: Both. He’d had a big job at Ampex. He was number two at Ampex, and he’dalso had a small venture fund that he had actually run. He was a worthwhilepartner.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. You know the fact that you were specializing—do I deduce from thatthat it is at least helpful, if not important, to know about the technology?Assuming that the company is a tech company, that you know somethingabout the technology. Bowes: It’s important. The entrepreneurs have more respect for you if you can talktheir language. I couldn’t talk their language. I could talk the medical talk, butI couldn’t talk the technology talk, and I couldn’t talk the retail talk either. It’snot that difficult, I just didn’t have any experience at all in retailing. So it wasa natural split, actually.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, and yet, speaking of retail, you said something last time about how in theearly days you did have a heavier investment in retail. Bowes: Yes, we told our investors we were going to do about a third, a third, a third.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And they liked that? Bowes: Yes. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because it was diversified? Bowes: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. But when you get into those very different areas, is there anything thatchanges about your investment approach or your management approach? Bowes: Yes, it’s different because I think we were three one-man gangs, because weall had our areas. I could talk to a technologist and make up my mind whetherhe was the kind of a person I would back, but I certainly couldn’t evaluate thequality of his technology, and the same with retail. I’m pretty good at judgingpeople. That was what I brought to the party for retail and technology, and itseemed to work out.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Would you say that aside from the different areas that the three of you werespecializing in that each of you had other skills? You as a people reader, forexample, and the other two may have had— Bowes: Well, everybody thinks he’s a good people reader, so I’m not going to claimthat as an exclusive.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: No, no, but maybe you had it more in spades than they did. Bowes: That would be an opinion. [chuckling] We don’t deal with opinions, we dealwith facts. I went on retail boards; I went on technology boards, so I felt Icould contribute in a business sense, I just couldn’t tell you where they wereblowing smoke on the development of the next new thing or not.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you tend to get more excited about certain areas rather than others? Bowes: Well, I like medical the best. Doing good, doing well by doing good doesappeal to me. You can sort of see and smell the results of your investing whensome product that wasn’t there before is there now and helps people withtough problems.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So these are all things that factor into a decision to invest? Bowes: I don’t quite get that question. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, it certainly wouldn’t be, I’m imagining, the fact that a medical devicecompany is going to do good, as you put it— Bowes: Or a biotech.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Or a biotech, as the only reason that you would invest, but it might be one ofthe thoughts that goes into the whole mix of factors that you’re looking atwhen you decide to invest. Bowes: Well, I made an early decision for the firm, and it’s been held to for all theseyears that we were only going to do therapeutic investments on the medicalside.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Really. Why? Bowes: Well, that’s where you can see the good and that’s where the money is.[chuckling] It turns out that’s where the money is.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] But that must be using the term— Bowes: So we weren’t going to do hospital chains.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh I see, but when you say— Bowes: {inaudible}—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You see when you say therapeutics, I think of pharmaceuticals. Bowes: Sure you do.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And I know you’ve done more than just pharmaceutical biotechs. Bowes: Well, all biotechs are pharmaceutical, aren’t they?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: No, well, it depends on how you— Bowes: They want to be a biopharmaceutical instead of a— <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, all right, I guess if you narrowly—it depends on, I guess, on how youdefine biotech, but some people would include medical devices underbiotech—that’s stretching it. Bowes: No, but we don’t, we don’t. Very different. Biotech is biology. Devices areknives.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Okay. [laughter] That’s pretty clear. Bowes: I will grant you that in the early days of biotech, nobody knew where it wasgoing, what form—it could have been bringing up oil out of shale, little bugswith drops of oil marching it up to the surface. It could have been diagnostics.It could have been animal help, it could have been bigger pigs, fatter cows.[chuckling] Nobody knew—and so it took a while for everybody to decidethat therapeutics was the place to be. If you could actually bring a cure to thetable, you had a worthwhile product and a worthwhile initiative. And so the whole biotech industry, with the exception of a few foodcompanies that use biotechnology to improve yields, the whole biotechindustry is biopharmaceuticals, which means therapeutics. Lately you’ve hadsome branching off into biodiagnostics, as the next possible big thing, butwe’re early there.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You can see that in what the early companies were doing, because I think wetalked about Amgen having quite a diverse array of early projects whichcertainly were not all in therapeutics, and I think most of them—I knowGenentech was not strictly therapeutic. It very soon came back to therapeutics,but it certainly backs up what you were saying, people kind of testing wherethis industry might go. Bowes: Yes, in companies that came along a little bit later—went straight intotherapeutics. They didn’t screw around with other stuff.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But why was that? Was that where the most money was to be made? Bowes: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. And then probably the very genuine motive that you yourself haveexpressed of quite obviously a socially useful product.  Bowes: Yes, therapeutics. Therapeutic products.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, another thing that seems to me doubtful that people really understood inthe very beginning about biotech was how long it was actually going to take toget a drug to market. Do you remember any discussions like that? Bowes: There were undoubtedly some misconceptions. I think if you were a hardheaded realist, you realized that the Federal Drug Administration wasn’t goingto change its rules just because you called yourself a biotech. You were goingto have to go through the same rigorous three phases of testing, and so itturned out that the length of time between discovery and marketplace didn’tchange much. Ten to fifteen years. [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And worse! Bowes: And worse. Ten years to a disaster.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, well, I think too in some of those first products, me-too products isn’tquite the word to use, but they were artificial reproductions of naturalproducts—for example, growth hormone and insulin. I think one of thethoughts was that because there were products like that already on the market,and obviously approved by the FDA, that when you came along with arecombinant form of insulin, it would just flow right through. Bowes: Sail through.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: —at the FDA I mean. And, of course, as we know now, looking back, itdidn’t. The FDA looked as hard at recombinant insulin as they would havelooked at any new drug. Bowes: Yes, they demanded proof positive of medical equivalency, and it takes a longtime for proof positive to be demonstrated.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: When you were starting out, you would have been exposed a little, maybe, atCetus, but then again, Cetus wasn’t really doing therapeutics in those earlyyears, was it. I’m just—maybe it’s easier to think about Amgen starting up in1981. Do you think, at that point that you really— Bowes: 1979. 40<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] Bowes: Really.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, okay. 1979—I guess I think of George Rathmann as being the one thatreally gets it going, but— Bowes: He came in ’80.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Okay, all right. Bowes: ’81 was the first important financing the company got, and that was January,so ’79-’80, ‘81.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right. I stand corrected. [chuckling] Do you think, though, at that stage, thateverybody, including you, really were considering all the hurdles that a newdrug would have to go through? Was that obvious? Bowes: [pause] Well, I think we were fairly realistic about it. What we hoped was wewould have early indications of real promise in a drug, such that the financialmarket would recognize this as a real promising initiative and would financethe time required, which turned out to be true. Amgen had one, two, three,four—five or six financings from founding to drug in the market over thoseyears, and you needed every one of them, otherwise you would run out ofmoney. So if you can show promise of efficacy and promise of no safetyproblems in a drug early, the money will come.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So did each of those financings tend to follow some kind of demonstration? Bowes: No. They followed—sometimes they’re just opportune—the stock market hasa funny way of opening and closing, and you have to grab money while youcan. We did that a couple of times—just get ready and do it. I think at somepoints, say along ’86 or ’87, in there, the market was pretty sure Amgen hadan important drug and they were willing to finance the money for clinicaltrials.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that EPO [erythropoietin]?  Bowes: Yes, that was EPO. EPO was kind of a world record eight years. Eight yearsfrom company funding. Five years from discovery. To on the market in onlyfive years, which was really a record.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, yes. Bowes: Clinical trials were so definitive for that drug. You could give it to—youcould go into a hospital room, with beds on each side and you’d give the drugto those people and you wouldn’t give it to these people and they’d havedifferent skin color—pink and gray, like that [claps hands]. Pretty good.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you see that? Bowes: Yes. Pretty convincing. It made the clinical trials a little easier when it was soclear.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is it true, and I think you at the board level would have known that the EPOproject was in danger of being dropped at one stage, and that it was Rathmannwho kept the funding going for it? Bowes: It was tough science. There was discussion of dropping it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. Did you take a stand? Bowes: [chuckling] No. That’s a scientists’ discussion.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. So you kept your mouth shut when it was— Bowes: Well, I didn’t want him to bet the whole farm on that one project. But we hadsome very determined scientists at the lower level—heroes in this case—whojust pushed and pushed and pushed. They worked ungodly hours for many,many months and eureka! When the news came, I was brought to a biggathering of scientists for the scientist who made the breakthrough, the wholeroom got up and cheered and clapped, which was kind of nice for him. [pause]So?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] I was wondering if you were going to say more. I steered youaway from USVP again and we devolved into questions of social usefulness. Iprobably should ask you a better question or a more primary question. What, if you had to give the one most important reason for making an investment,what would you say? Bowes: Well, the most important reason for making an investment is to provide areturn for our investors. That’s what they have entrusted us to do.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right. All right, well then, in deciding, there are many opportunities out there.Why this opportunity rather than that one? Bowes: Well, the most important single thing is—is there a big market for this productand will the market pay a decent price for this product? The number two thingis the people. The market’s more important than the people.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is that so. Bowes: You can change the people, but you can’t change the market.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So is that the first thing you look at? And you would do some research. Bowes: Yes. Our own research, consultants’ research—the research that’s been doneby the entrepreneurs is often really very good. You can validate that and youput all your resources into doing a quick evaluation. These opportunities areoften very competitive. There might be ten venture capitalists wanting toinvest in this particular team, and it doesn’t pay to wait around.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How long has that been true where there is— Bowes: It ebbs and flows.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Really. Bowes: But it’s usually true. The good groups get funded quite quickly. The moneymay not come in quickly, but the commitments get made quite quickly, and itoften adds up to more money than the entrepreneur wants to take, so he has tocut back and, say, eliminate firms or cut everybody back pro rata. So it’s a fungame.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It must be—you’re still at it.  Bowes: No, I’m not.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, you are in the sense of giving advice, right? Bowes: Oh yes. I like to go to the meetings.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is it commonplace to put market ahead of people? Bowes: I don’t know if its commonplace or not, but it’s not uncommon, I’m sure. Itonly makes sense. If there’s nobody going to buy this product, why bother. Ifthere are very few people who are going to buy this product, why bother. Ithas to be—you have to look at a potential—we call it a TAM.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What does that stand for? Bowes: Total Available Market. TAM. It has to be $500 million or more to be trulyinteresting. If you have that kind of a TAM, you can have a company of a sizethat attracts attention either from acquirers or from the IPO market. That’swhat you have to have to make a return.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But it would seem to me, being a complete non-economic-proficient person,that nonetheless, even if you decide that it’s market over everything, that thereare a lot of factors that are connected with that. One that I think of, and I’msure there are more, is that if it’s really an innovative product, then how doknow? Bowes: You don’t know. You never know.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, then how are you deciding? Bowes: You have an opinion.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] You just said that venture capitalists weren’t supposed to haveopinions! Bowes: [chuckling] You got me there. If you’re talking about what a market’s goingto be four years from now, it’s all opinions. There are no facts available toyou. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, opinions and experience, though. Bowes: Yes, and research.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But you do think about all those things, because I’m imagining that there aresome markets that it’s very obvious that there’s a call for x product, thatothers you think, well, maybe, but we’re going to have to do a lot of buildingto get to the point where we’re really actually going to have a market if wecan get this product out. Bowes: And you also have to think about competitive response to a product like this.When we get to here, is Cisco going to eat our lunch? Or are we going to besomething that they can’t quite compete with, something that’s too clever forthem for the moment. So those competitive pressures are part of the marketanalysis—who’s in there now, potentially, could be right there with us andthey’re big and strong.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And what about the legal aspect, the intellectual property picture? Bowes: Well, you have to have it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, in your product—but also— Bowes: It’s a lot more important in the medical area.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, so would you look—you or your people look at what the patent situationis in x area of medicine? Bowes: Sure, of course.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And if the thicket is too dense you might decide that this isn’t the wisestinvestment? Bowes: Oh yes. Intellectual property is one of the six things you have to check off.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What are some of the others? Bowes: Size of market, [laughter]—quality of— <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That seems to be quite a theme! Bowes: Quality of team, IP—intellectual property, competitive response, speed ofmarket uptake. I mean if it’s going to be big in fifteen years, it doesn’t workfor investment purposes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because you want return in about five or eight years. Bowes: Yes, five or eight. So timing of the market—just a whole bunch of stuff likethat. It’s all the nuts and bolts of the business.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right. All right. Could we return to number two consideration—namely, thepeople? I realize—I hear you saying that there’s a lot of intuition involved, butcan you— Bowes: A lot of research too.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, on the people’s background. Bowes: Oh yes. Intense checking.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How do you do that? Bowes: Former employers. And they hate it, because you’re not supposed tobadmouth somebody who has worked for you. It’s almost illegal.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, can’t they refuse? Bowes: Yes. You have to talk them into not refusing, so you’ve got to come in as afriend of a friend, or a friend of a friend of a friend, so that they can bepersuaded to whisper quietly the facts of the matter.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. Is that where your name and experience might help too? Bowes: Yes, sure. We all have networks, and at a partners meeting—who knows soand so, who knows so and so, would you give him a call and see if he’ll talk tome about so and so. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And are you usually doing that yourself? Bowes: I—not anymore. Used to.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Used to though. You were really hands on doing all this. Bowes: Oh yes, we don’t have anybody else.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] So you get you the loner. Bowes: If you don’t do it, it doesn’t get done. You can’t ask an associate to try to prysensitive information out of a CEO. He’s not going to even take the call.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It’s not going to work any way. Bowes: So it’s very much hands on. It’s important to have a reputation down therethat’s pretty unqualified.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. Which—and what goes into that unqualified? Bowes: Just your life experience with these people. They’ve dealt with you, you’vedealt with them, mutual respect, mutual liking, just the usual set ofinteractions that go on in a busy business life. You’re meeting people all thetime and you’re either favorably or unfavorably inclined, usually, and viceversa. So you have your pals and your partners have their pals and yourpartners’ pals have their pals, and it’s just a big network of pals. [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And then you all go to the Bohemian Grove in the summer. Bowes: We have, let’s say, fifteen people in my firm.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Really? Partners or everybody. Bowes: Investment professionals. Two of us are Bohemians, so that’s the proportion.We probably have more Bohemians than lots of other firms. So anyway, theBohemian Club has not got much to do with Silicon Valley. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, aren’t there quite a number of people who stem from there though? Notnecessarily? Bowes: No, absolutely not. The Bohemian Club started as a journalists’ club, and ittook them ten years to deign to have businessmen in the club. Even now, ifyou’re talented or if you’re a journalist or a college professor, you’re in [clapshands]—as opposed to waiting fifteen years. And you’re in for a song, so—it’s very biased, in a sense. Populationwise, it’s very biased against business,which is what makes it fun. [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] You’re the renegades? Bowes: Not quite that bad.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All right. Well, I pulled some things off your Website if I can find it—[soundof shuffling papers]. All right. Bowes: This is USVP?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: USVP. Quote—“Bowes’s belief that venture capitalists should guidecompanies based on real world experience continues to set the tone at USVP.”Real world experience meaning in actually investing and managing companiessuccessfully? Bowes: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That seems to me to be a given. Presumably you said that— Bowes: I didn’t write that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: No. [chuckling] But your name is connected with it. I was just wondering ifthere was more to it than that—that it was a way of trying to distinguishUSVP from the rest of the world, as though maybe there is another way ofdoing it. Bowes: [pause] Well, we like to think as a firm that we have fairly unique capabilitiesin helping managements achieve their goals. We always think of ourselves,after we’ve written the check, as unpaid consultants. Our consulting is muchmore important than the checkwriting, in our view. So we advise and consult and we help with contacts. We help with recruiting; we help choose lawyers;we help choose accountants; we help choose investment bankers. We’re justall over the company in a—hopefully non-interfering, but always constructiveand helpful, way. I think we think we’re pretty good at this. I’m not sayingother firms aren’t, because they are, but we just want to make it clear that wethink we are. [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So that’s what that statement means. Bowes: I guess so, yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But it does give a certain advantage to partnerships that have been around fora while. Bowes: Sure, sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Who can look back on considerable years of experience. So it makes mewonder—is the venture capital industry, and I think we can call it an industrythese days, can’t we? Bowes: Sure. A small industry.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: A small industry. Again, with economic downturn what I’m going to sayprobably doesn’t make too much sense, but what I’m thinking—are theopportunities to invest so great that it opens the field to newer venturecapitalists and newer venture capital partnerships that in the old days, justbecause they were new and inexperienced, might have had a hard timebreaking in? Bowes: That happens from time to time. I think the most notable time was in the latenineties, early 2000, when the first Internet wave came along and you hadventures and venture firms springing up in great numbers. You had kids atHarvard Business School starting a business before they graduated and gettingmoney, and there was a horrendous failure rate from all that. Then, as we liketo say, all the tourists went home, and we got back to the good old boys who’dbeen doing it all along. So what you mostly find in terms of new firms is people who have hived offfrom other firms. Say, our group of twelve, and three of them are moreambitious than being in this firm and they want to go off and do their own andthey’re experienced. So they’re really an experienced firm even thoughthey’re a startup. So it’s hard to get into this business without putting in your time. Our young guys, our associates are—they’re experienced. They’veworked in industry. They’re experienced and now they’re learning the venturecapital business and getting even more experience and one of these daysthey’ll be a partner. It’s hard to bypass the process. It’s just hard. Bob and Stu and I, we got away with it because we were fifty-plus years oldand we had a successful life experience in each case. People gambled on us asa team, but it’s hard for a thirty-five year old to say that. So the way forwardfor young people is to get with the firm and learn the business.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And what about the importance of an MBA? Bowes: [pause] I think work experience is more important. If you had a goodmarketing job at Intel, that beats an MBA. An MBA is a little bit general forthe venture business. Later on, it’s fine, but it’s not the exact profile you needto have to get hired by a good firm.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I had questions about distinguishing USVP from other venture capitalpartnerships, but I’m imagining you’ve more or less answered that. It’s thisbasis on experience and operating experience particularly, would you say? Bowes: Operating experience and investing experience. We just raised our tenth fund,so the combined operating and investment experience of the group goes backnow for twenty-five years. It gets easier to sell yourself as you move forward.[chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you have any preference in terms of being a lead investor? Bowes: Yes. We much prefer to be a lead investor.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And why is that? Bowes: We trust ourselves. [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Very good! If you don’t, who does? Bowes: Right, but there are ten or a dozen other firms that we’re—we’re okay ifthey’re the lead. We’d much prefer to be the lead or the co-lead, but we willdo a deal if they’re the lead, and we like the deal. There are other firms thatwe wouldn’t. No names [chuckling]. 50<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But is there a pattern in the mix with whom you would choose to associate? Bowes: Every firm has its patterns. The people you are comfortable with, the keypeople you’ve had success with become your trading partners. If you’relooking for partners, and most of us don’t do an entire transaction byourselves—if you’re looking for partners, you look for people you can workwith and you look for people who have particular expertise in this kind of aproject. Those are the two criteria, and we pretty much stick by those two.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And the reason that you want partners is more money and spread the risk? Bowes: Spread the risk and spread the work. As I said, we’re unpaid consultants andit’s nice if you can spread that around.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. Well, you know—I also have questions about more on the hands-on, theactual management of the company, but the way we could handle that is bylooking at some of the specific companies that we ticked last time as worthyof discussion? Bowes: Okay.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I’m wondering about the nitty gritty of after you’ve decided to invest and nowyou want to get this company off the ground and you’ve talked about the veryearly stages, being involved in hiring expertise in various areas. But whatabout at a slightly different stage, when this new company is actuallybeginning to function? What is your role there? Should we look at specificcompanies, or do you want to talk more generally? Bowes: I think it’s probably easier to look at specific companies.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Okay. Well, the first one that happens to be ticked—I don’t know the actualchronology of your investments, but Applied Micro Circuits [Corporation],which, of all the ones that you wanted to talk about, as far as I can tell, is theonly one that is not a Bay Area company. Bowes: True.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is that somewhat of an anomaly? Do you prefer to have companies closer athand?  Bowes: We like to be able to visit our companies and get back home the same day. SoSan Diego is a bit far, but—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, Canada is even further, isn’t it? Bowes: Pardon me.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, although this is British Columbia, wasn’t it? Bowes: Which?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Applied Micro Circuits is in Canada, right? Bowes: No, it’s in San Diego.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, oh. Bowes: Must be a different company with a similar name.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All right. Oh, I’m sorry about that. I Googled Applied Micro Circuits and Igot a company in British Columbia. Bowes: Well, maybe there is another {unintelligible}. We call it AMCC. If youGoogled AMCC, you might get San Diego. Applied Micro Circuits, AMCC.That’s its stock ticker, that name.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Would you want to talk about that investment and your hands-on role? Bowes: What are some of the other ones?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Advanced Cardiovascular Systems, Applied Biosystems, Sun Microsystems,and Ventritex. Those were the ones that you indicated you might want to talkabout. Bowes: I’d rather talk about some of those, because they were closer to home and youcould actually spend more time.  Well, Applied Biosystems. I’d heard about a professor at Caltech who had amachine in his basement he’d invented that was supposed to do great things.So I went down to see him and sure enough—he had one which he and acouple of his lab assistants had put together. It was a gene sequencer which—gene sequencing had been very laborious to do. It took hundreds of hours.This thing speeded it up by at least a hundred times, and this was veryimportant for research, gene sequencing, and—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: This must be Lee Hood. Bowes: Yes. I went to see him, and he was wearing lederhosen in the office. [laughter]My kind of guy!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you find that—your intuition was probably working on that one. Bowes: No, we had no idea for Lee to manage the company. It took a year to get thatmachine out of the clutches of Caltech. They were very anti-business.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were they? Bowes: Yes, as a sort of a mindset, but eventually we got it to where we could form acompany, and we immediately moved it to the Bay Area and we found aperson who was working at Hewlett-Packard whose life experience there wastaking machines that the scientists had dreamed up at Hewlett-Packard andsort of thrown over the wall to be developed into a commercial version. So hedecided that this was a really worthwhile thing to do. So he left HewlettPackard, became the chief executive office at Applied Bio and turned themachine into an industrial product. The biotech companies were really excitedby the prospect of this machine.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I’ll bet. Bowes: So they paid real money to get on a waiting list for a machine that had neverbeen built. [chuckling] A little persuasion there—and so it avoided a lot offinancing that we would have otherwise had—that would have been dilutive.Sure enough it became a product and it became a company. One of the nicethings about the machine was that it required reagents to work, and so thatwas a steady revenue stream of reagents revenue.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Which Applied Biosystems was supplying.  Bowes: Making, yes. It was very successful and went public and did fine andeventually was acquired by a big guy. I think the big guy changed his name toApplied Biosystems. It was just bought recently, and it was a big success.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: When you first went down to see Lee Hood, did he already know that he hadsomething that was commercializable? Bowes: No. He thought it was going to be a laboratory instrument.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. So did you have to do some fast talking? Bowes: He was pretty receptive to the thought of making money [laughter]—andseeing his machine used broadly.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Used. It was so— Bowes: Because he felt it would advance the whole industry.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, which it did. Had he patented it? Or had the university patented it? Bowes: We went to work.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, right away. But that’s another indication that he hadn’t thought about— Bowes: He hadn’t, no. But he saw the virtue of doing that very quickly. He was aquick study.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did he eventually become directly involved with Applied Bio? Bowes: No, never.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Never. He remained—well, he’s not at Caltech anymore, is he. Bowes: No, he was a spiritual father and a pretty big stockholder, too. He wasavailable for scientific advice if something happened, but the guy we found atHewlett-Packard was so good that we didn’t really have to call on Lee for much of anything. He was hired away from Caltech by the University ofWashington.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That’s right. Bowes: Bill Gates funded a whole big laboratory for him, so that was a good careermove for Lee.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, it was, and then the Human Genome Project came along as well. Bowes: Well, although his machines did a lot on that, he wasn’t that involvedpersonally. He finally decided that he couldn’t get done what he wanted to getdone inside of a university, so he’s founded his own institute up in Seattle.Institute for Systems Biology.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Really—and actually laboratory machines—or developing laboratorymachines? Bowes: Doing intense research on the next wave of predictive and preventativemedicine.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And he couldn’t do it in the university because he couldn’t get funding? Bowes: No. Because he couldn’t move at the speed he had to move, in his view. Toomany people had to approve every project, and it just drove him nuts.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That’s interesting, though, isn’t it. Because you hear a lot about theindustrialization of the university—at least you do on the Berkeley campus,with BP and a lot of corporate investment, and yet there remains quite adistinction, does there not, between academia and the business world? Bowes: You had many riots over there, didn’t you, with the BP thing?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, oh yes, we’re known for that. We also like oak trees. [laughter][technical interruption to change tape][End Audio File 3]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All right. Is that enough about Applied Bio? Bowes: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Would you like to talk about another one? Bowes: We can talk about ACS—if you know what that stands for.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Advanced Cardiovascular Systems. Bowes: And do you know what that is, or was?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I know it makes or made medical devices, and it’s located in SantaClara. That’s not very much, is it, so I hope you can fill in! [chuckling] Bowes: When I got involved, it was located in Mountain View, which is pretty close.It was kind of a classic marriage of Silicon Valley technology with unmetmedical needs. What they put together there was a [microphone rubbingsounds] device for angioplasty. Do you know angioplasty?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. Bowes: Well, all of the bypass operations that were being done, heart bypass, all ofthem were unnecessary, because the patient wasn’t that sick, but there was noalternative. So this angioplasty, which had been invented by a guy inSwitzerland, but he had never come up with a really good product—heinvented the process, really. So we set out to really do a first-class angioplastymachine, and we did.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But how had you even heard of the Swiss device? Bowes: Oh, in reading.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you found it and thought this was something that should be developed. Bowes: No, that was later. A friend of mine found it and persuaded me that it shouldbe developed, and I agreed. We found some really brilliant technicians whogot the job done, and then we found a brilliant CEO—he was from San Diego—either Orange County or San Diego. The whole thing fit very wellwith his business smarts and the technological achievements of thetechnicians. We got that company going in ’84, I guess, and it really took off.The reason it took off, to be perfectly honest, was that it gave doctors whoweren’t so fantastic a chance to do a procedure that was lifesaving or lifeenhancing, and do it more than once a day. So we provided seminars fordoctors to learn how to do it here, three days by operating on pigs.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You mean literally at the partnership? Bowes: No—we would rent some space. And they had to pay their own way, the docs.So that was a profit center, [laughter] because we had a waiting list of docsthat wanted to learn how to do this procedure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, who were coming from all over? Bowes: All over, all over. There was a doc in Kansas City three years later who wasmaking more money that [Michael E.] DeBakey.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh my heavens. Bowes: He was doing four or five a day and charging $15,000 per. [chuckling] Notbad! And that really got going beautifully, and then one of the bigpharmaceutical companies noticed it and decided they wanted to get into thedevice business and they bought it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Who was that? Bowes: Eli Lilly.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. And it’s still a going part of their operation? Bowes: Well, Eli Lilly put together a number of device companies, and then theydecided that they wanted to separate their device companies from thepharmaceutical, and they spun it out into a separate corporation to theirstockholders. It became a company called Guidant.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh. Yes.  Bowes: ACS was the most important part of Guidant, always. Guidant was just sold acouple of years ago to Boston Scientific for some ungodly [laughter] amountof money, but we did fine on that investment. It was a very good success.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And is it—did it have an effect, [a siren in the background] I’m imagining, onthe number of bypass operations? Did they go down because— Bowes: Yes, oh yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: There was now an alternative. An easier alternative. Bowes: Yes, it got very flat.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. Interesting. I didn’t know that. Bowes: We also had a company a little later which does minimally invasive heartbypass operations. Instead of breaking open your chest and attaching a vein upto here, to here, you go in through the ribs and you do it with robotic devices.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh really. I haven’t— Bowes: You have a screen and you tweak the device looking at the screen and thenyou—the patient goes home the next day.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: My heavens. Bowes: That’s now about 20 or 25 percent of the bypass market.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is it! Bowes: The problem with that—this was called CardioThoracic Systems. Theproblem with that company, for investment success, was that the older docscouldn’t do it. [chuckling] They didn’t have the videogame experience, thehand-eye coordination.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, I can imagine!  Bowes: They knew knives, and so you had to wait for the next generation—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: To come up. Bowes: —of docs that did this. And so we sold the company because we justcouldn’t—we couldn’t afford to wait a decade for the whole population toshift over.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, you can see how that would be a very different sort of thing! Bowes: Oh yes, it’s pretty intuitively obvious.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. It’s sort of a—I see a parallel, maybe not a terribly accurate one in—oneof my sons is an architect, and he got jobs rather easily in the beginning,mundane jobs, but in architectural firms, because he could do CAD—computer assisted design, and the older guard wasn’t used to—they were usedto hand drawing their architectural elevations. Bowes: Well, these big-time international architects have massive CAD operations.It’s one of their strengths. They all do—have computer rooms that arecranking away.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh yes, yes, but you see—that’s a newer generation that’s doing that sort of— Bowes: These are old guys, but they were smart enough to hire the young guys.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh yes, yes. Well, my son found that out! [chuckling] Bowes: How’s he doing? How’s he doing?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh he’s doing fine. He’s now out on his own! Bowes: By himself?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. I was scared, but he seems to have more business than he can handle.  Bowes: I have a friend who has a son who’s out on his own—Pfau, [spells]. Theyprobably know of each other.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: They probably do. All right. Let’s—if you don’t mind, talk very generallyabout venture capital per innovation, which I think anybody who knows theindustry at all would agree with. But perhaps what there might be someargument about is why that is. Putting it simplistically—is the innovation thatcomes from venture capital, or can come from venture capital investment, dueto the process by which firms are selected? Or, and perhaps as an and/or—is itthe management that venture capitalists such as yourself give to the new firmthat accounts, at least in part, for the innovative outcome. Bowes: It’s absolutely the combination. We would be nowhere without the innovators.They have the ideas.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, right. Bowes: We don’t have the ideas. We have thoughts, but not ideas. Sometimes we havethoughts that are pretty definite, and we go out and try to find people whomight think the same way, but the innovators are the ones that are the bedrockand we’re there to help them succeed. They all want to succeed. Some of themwant to succeed professionally and financially, and some of them want tohave a product that they can be remembered for. There are all kinds ofmotives. But you get people coming from all over the world, innovators, to be inSilicon Valley, and we welcome that certainly. All of our CEOs are not fromthe U.S. originally. It feeds on itself. Once the rhetoric was laid years ago, andit’s sort of been building and building and building, organically, innovators,financial success, more innovators, financial success, and it’s just[coughing]—it can be said, I think, with truth, that innovation is whatseparates this country from others. I think Silicon Valley, and other venturecapitalized areas less so, are really pretty importantly involved in that. If therewas no way for these young tigers to succeed, they’d do something else, and Ithink it would just be a dream, so it’s really an incredibly mutually beneficialsituation. We all think it’s great for the country, competitively.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you find that, in general, the people that come from elsewhere tend tostay? Or is there a movement to get something started and then take it back tothe home country. 60 Bowes: On the whole they tend to stay. They like it here. They’re usually young.When they start, they’re usually thirty, thirty-five, forty. Their kids grow uphere and go to school here, and they get pretty entrenched. A few go home butit’s the exception. That’s not true of college students. A lot of the collegegraduates go home because opportunities are opening up in China, India. Ifyou’re a scientist that wants to be a scientist, you’re not interested inentrepreneurship, you might as well go home—probably less competitive backthere for what you want to do, but the entrepreneurs that have startedcompanies that either failed or succeeded—if they failed they want to tryagain. They’ll tend to stay here.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You hear a lot about how America is falling behind in terms of science andtechnical education. Do you see any signs of that in terms of the innovativecapacity of young Americans these days? Maybe looking back over yourcareer? Bowes: I think it’s too soon to feel the effects of it. I think you can see the precursorsof it. You can see that the engineering class at Berkeley, graduate engineeringclass, is two-thirds Asian. A lot of those guys and gals are not going to stay.They’re going to go home right away. That’s a brain drain, and of course,particularly the Far East—the Indias and the Chinas and the Singapores andthe Koreas—Taiwan—they bet their whole country on innovation, in a sense.They just feel they’ve got to be there, so their educational system doesn’t kidaround and their parents don’t kid around. Those kids hustle, and I think we’regetting out-hustled, which is not a good thing. We don’t see it in the venture capital business because so many of the smartIndians come here—even from India. They get educated over there, like oneof the founders of Sun, Vinod Khosla, who was educated in the highesttechnological college in India, went to Carnegie Mellon for more computertraining, and then went to Stanford Business School, and he’s been here eversince. And that goes for lots and lots and lots of foreign-born, but the nextgeneration is what worries you.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, yes. Bowes: It worries a lot of people. I think at the Bohemian Grove in the last couple ofweeks, I must have heard three talks about this by very highly placedpeople—very worried.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: With any suggestions about what to do about it? Aside from just worry?  Bowes: Everybody knows what the problems are, it’s just that they seem insolvable. Itstarts at home.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right. And that’s pretty hard to get to, isn’t it. Bowes: It’s pretty hard to get to.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: This is a really general question, so you can drop out or say it’s absurd to tryto answer it, but is there something that you can say about how venture capitalis, as we think of it now, a phenomenon of the last sixty years, maybe, if youstart with ’58—what has been its effect? Do you want some water? Bowes: [coughing] Yes, I’d like some water. Thank you.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: —its effect on the American and the specifically Californian economy? Is thatan impossible question? Bowes: Well, you just have to look at the companies that have resulted from venturecapital to realize it has made a huge difference in the competitive effect on bigcompanies, of these other littler companies. It has a huge effect in wakingthem up, so I think it’s had a big uplifting effect on the American economy. InCalifornia, first, of course, but the country, too. [coughing]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I’d like to hear about some of your nonprofit activities, but before we go there,would you like to say more about the venture capital aspect of your life? Bowes: It’s hard work; it’s a lot of fun; it can be rewarding; it’s good for the country. Ijust feel lucky to have been as involved as I have been. No regrets. I did a lotof commuting.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, it seems to me— Bowes: The only thing I regret is the commute.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Hmm? Bowes: The only thing I regret is the commute. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, well, that’s relatively minor. The gas prices weren’t as bad as they arenow. I know you’ve done many things in the nonprofit world, and one of themthat seemed, in my mind, to be connected to the educational part of it— Bowes: Three in Berkeley.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes? Bowes: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Really, like what? Bowes: Well, I haven’t started one yet, but I’ve committed to it. One’s called theBerkeley Incentive Awards, which started as an experiment here in town.What we did was to pick the best kid out of each public high school in SanFrancisco. By best it means scholastic drive and he had to be poor, he or shehad to be poor. Twelve schools here, pick that best kid and send him toBerkeley for four years, everything paid. That was an experiment, and we hada great committee to select the kids and great mentoring over at Berkeley forthe kids. Now it’s statewide, almost. We have hundreds of kids in Berkeley,Berkeley Incentive Awards, four years, full boat. When we go to San Jose, we find San Jose money that will support this, samething in L.A., same thing in Salinas, same thing in Oakland, so it’s brought aterrific bunch of kids to Berkeley that couldn’t have gotten there, and they’vedone well, gotten a 99 percent graduation rate and a really good after-schoolrecord.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How long has it been going? Bowes: Oh God—I guess it’s a dozen years now.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And so you follow after graduation what becomes of these children and youngadults? Bowes: Oh sure we do. We have a big dinner every May. They come and we come.It’s really heartwarming, hear some stories. It’s really something. The otherone—I’ve got an arrangement but we’re going to start later in the year withProfessor Tijan and that’s going to be—if he finds a young person he really wants to get to Cal and needs some program money, I’ll provide the programmoney for that—maybe one or two or three a year.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: For graduate school? Or what level. Bowes: Post-grads—but exceptional. They have to be embarked on a project whichlooks like it might be exciting but needs resources, and it’s too early forgovernment resources, it’s too early for Berkeley resources, so it’s Tijan and Iwill choose the person, and I’ll provide the funding for three years for thatperson to see if what he’s got is really something.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, good. Bowes: That’ll be fun.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why Tijan? Did you know him before this got started? Bowes: Oh I’ve met him. I’ve met him, and then several times he came after me andsuggested this. I guess he pressed my button. [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And then there’s a third one connected with Berkeley, right? Bowes: That’s a prep school pointed at Berkeley, in Berkeley. It’s just getting started,so it’s too soon to declare success. We’re working on it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It’s not Maybeck, is it? Bowes: No, it’s not Maybeck.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Another educational foray of yours is the Exploratorium. How did you getinvolved? Bowes: Oh it’s always a friend. It was a friend who was already involved. Well, I justlike what they’re doing there, trying to solve our problem by getting kidsinterested in science at an early age, catching them early. The Exploratoriumis completely interactive. You’ve got 500 exhibits out there, and they’re allinteractive and the kids just eat them up. The second part of it is we teachteachers how to teach science. We have several hundred a year come, twoweek crash course. When they go back they feel much more comfortable teaching science than they did before. What we’ve observed with thoseteachers is they stay teachers. They don’t drop out, as opposed to the usual—you know what the average is? Four years.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, well you can understand why considering what they are up against. Bowes: Right. Yes, I’m involved in Teach for America too. You know that one?Teach for America?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I know of it, yes. Bowes: It’s a great organization. There’s a relatively new book out called Forces forGood:[ The Six Practices of High-Impact Nonprofits], which is a consultant’sview of the most effective nonprofits in the country, not including universitiesand that sort of thing, but other types. Teach for America is one of the twelve.They picked twelve. Teach for America is one. Exploratorium is another.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh really! Bowes: Yes! I’m involved in a third that’s on that list—it’s Environmental Defense[Fund]. That’s a great organization.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you have a connection with it as well? Bowes: Yes, I’m on the board. They go about environmental change, I think, the rightway. They try to make things happen, together, they don’t do the—if youknow what I mean.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It’s collaborative rather than pontification. Bowes: Their motto is “Finding the Ways that Work.” That’s what they try to do, andI think they’re really good. They have an office here in town. It’s not theirmain office, but—one of the guys out here—his project at EnvironmentalDefense is to reverse the decline in the fish population. It’s worthwhile. Howdo you do that? Well, you do that by getting groups of fishermen, that have anarea, to not be greedy for the long-term sake. Take a measured catch, no more,and lo and behold, the fish come back! It’s amazing. It happens every time,and it’s a hard sell.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I bet.  Bowes: Because these guys are in it for a living. But it’s taken hold in a few areas, andnow we’ve got some things we can point to as successful. We’re hoping to usethat to ever increase the number of converts.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You spent some time talking about Berkeley, but I know you have probablyeven, at least longer-term connections with UCSF? Bowes: Oh no. Berkeley goes back a long time before.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Does it, does it. Bowes: My father and my uncle were twin brothers, and all of his kids went toBerkeley.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. Bowes: All of my father’s kids went to Stanford. So I spent a lot of time at Berkeley,because that’s where all the pretty girls were [laughter] during my Stanfordyears.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But you have—you’ve been on the board of directors at UCSF? Bowes: It’s the board of directors of the [UCSF] Foundation.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Of the foundation, right. And you still are? Bowes: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. Were you involved in some of the work to get Mission Bay going? Bowes: Yes. I was chairman of the—well, it worked—it was a big fundraising andpart of it was for Mission Bay. I was in charge of that part, chairman of thatcommittee. We raised a lot of money and Mission Bay is up and going. Haveyou been down there?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. I’ve done some interviewing down there.  Bowes: Have you. Quite a place now, isn’t it?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, yes. And the person that hooked me on biotech was Bill Rutter whohappened to be the first person that I interviewed in biotech. Of course, he’smoved down not so much as a biochemist—but I suppose you would call himan entrepreneur now. Bowes: Oh sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. Bowes: Well, it all—when I was working getting Amgen started, we asked Bill to beon our scientific board of advisors, and he said he would. Then some venturecapitalists sung sweet songs to him, and he decided to start his own company![laughter] Which is fine. He did fine, and the community center there isnamed for him.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right, yes. Bowes: William J. Rutter. In May the Exploratorium chose Bill as their person of theyear.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh did they! Bowes: For their annual fundraising dinner.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I didn’t know that. Bowes: I had the pleasure of introducing Bill to the crowd of 600 people. He said,what did he say—“If it weren’t for Bill Bowes, I wouldn’t have gotten theidea to start Chiron.” [chuckling] So I guess I—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. Well, there’s some truth in that you know. Bowes: There probably is some truth in that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because it was Amgen, I think—well, it was probably a little bit more thanAmgen, but certainly Amgen gave him the momentum, didn’t it.  Bowes: Yes, I think so. He’s a great guy. He’s a terrific fellow.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, yes. Let’s see. Oh there are a lot of them, aren’t there. One that—whereis it now—oh there’s QB3 too, which brings in all those universities, doesn’tit. Bowes: Just three, just three.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: QB— Bowes: QB3.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, QB3 [chuckling]. Bowes: Three universities.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, that brings in three. Right. The one that seems a little bit different—well,no, there are several that are a little bit different. I’m looking at the SanFrancisco Conservatory of Music and the Asian Art Museum and GraceCathedral. All, as far as I know, non-scientific, non-medical. Bowes: Well, I think you’d say that the conservatory was education.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh right. Bowes: Grace is just a great place.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is that your church? Bowes: Yes. What I like about it is it’s so inclusive. Everybody’s welcome. It’s notwhat I grew up with as an Episcopal Church, which is fairly strict and straight,but it’s—come on in and we’ll help you improve your life. [chuckling] I’mjust—I [unintelligible, microphone rubbing and banging sound]. I got talkedinto the Asian Art Museum by a friend.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You didn’t have any particular interest in Asian art?  Bowes: Oh I like it, but I’m not a real aficionado.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why the Conservatory of Music? Bowes: Classical music education is particularly important because it’s not as popularas it used to be, and I think it needs support. We have a great president there,and we had a project of moving the conservatory, which is now done. It wasout on 19th Avenue in the fog, and now it’s down amongst the other music andart. It’s down near the Opera House, near the symphony, and it’s bigger. Itsnew location has made them able to attract more and better students, so it’sbeen a big success, the move.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, we’re coming to the end. Is there anything you would like to add? Bowes: Nothing in particular. It’s been a pleasure talking with you.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Thank you. Bowes: I hope I haven’t left too many gaps in the story, and I hope it fits in with yourother interviews and gives a decently broad picture. Everybody comes at itdifferently, of course. I wasn’t as early as your other interviewees, but I wasobserving it before I got there.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. Bowes: So I do have that perspective. I’ll be really interested in reading whatevercomes out of this. Is it going to be a book?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Maybe. The first step is to get it all transcribed and then eventually up on theWeb and then it’s fair game. [chuckling] Bowes: [chuckling] Uh oh!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I thank you, it’s been a pleasure and very interesting for me. Bowes: Well, thank you. It’s been a pleasure for me. 
Interviewer: It’s March 31, 2010, and this is the first interview with Pete Bancroft,otherwise known as Paul Bancroft III. We are in his apartment in SanFrancisco.Why “Pete” when your formal name is Paul? Bancroft: Well, I was named Paul III when I was born, and since my father was Paul Jr.,immediately after that he started calling me Little Petey. And as I grew up Ididn’t like Little Petey very much, and so therefore it gradually morphed intobeing Pete, which is what I prefer. I’ve had a lot of fun through the yearsbecause when anybody calls and asks for Paul I know it’s an insurancesalesman or somebody I really don’t know, so I’ve found it’s a useful tool tocontinue.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, very handy. I should say that there is a longer oral history that yourdaughter Kim took that gets into the Bancroft family history in great detail.But I’d like to record at least a potted version, maybe starting with HubertHowe Bancroft, the Bancroft Library’s founder. Bancroft: Sure. Absolutely. He was born in 1832 in Granville, Ohio, got part waythrough high school and then went back to Buffalo, New York to go to workfor his brother-in-law, who was his older sister’s husband, in a book shop inBuffalo. He sort of apprenticed there for a couple of years, and during thistime the Gold Rush came along, and his brother-in-law decided to send himout to California with a consignment of books to sell in San Francisco. So indue course they sent off the books to go around the Cape. He went down andwent across the Isthmus of Panama, came up to San Francisco, and then wentto work in the gold fields for six months while he was awaiting the arrival ofthe books. And when they arrived, just about the time he got ready to set upshop and sell them, his brother-in-law died, and most of the assets that werereadily available were in the books that he had been sent. So he felt it wasincumbent upon himself to get rid of those books as fast as he could and goback East to try and help take care of the affairs of his sister.He arrived here early in 1852. He then returned east to help settle his sister’saffairs and spent another year or so, tried to settle back into a combination ofGranville, Ohio and Buffalo and really didn’t like it. He had been bitten by theCalifornia bug. He decided that he was going to come out here and make alifetime career of being in California. I think he was intrigued with the rapidchanges he had seen in his first trip and wanted to learn more about thisdeveloping area. He perhaps didn’t know the exact statistics at that point, but as we now know, there were fewer than seven thousand non-Indians in thewhole of what’s now the state of California in 1847. And within two yearsafter that a hundred thousand people had come in because of the Gold Rush.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Amazing. Bancroft: So a whole new civilization was being developed out of this sleepy littlecommunity out here. He evolved over time into first being fascinated by it andthen wanting to record it. He realized gradually that this was kind of the lastmarch of Western civilization. That it started in China and moved across Asiato Western Europe and then jumped the Atlantic to the eastern seaboard andas far west as St. Joe [St. Joseph], Missouri. And that really is as far as thedeveloped part of America had gotten, except for Lewis and Clark and a fewtrappers. There was this huge hiatus until all of a sudden the Gold Rush, andthen the big jump. He was absolutely intrigued with that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Interesting that he caught the historic aspect of it, whereas, speaking in broadterms, most people were looking at a way of making money, either throughgold or setting up businesses. Bancroft: Well, he was anxious to make money. But he was fascinated by the fact thatmost migrations have been of families and have been very slow, and youbarely eked out a living. Here there was an instant money economy that wasbeing created out of nothing. Because of gold it was a very liquid economy.Most of the miners hated their mining, but they had to eat and they had tohave clothes and they had to have all kinds of things. Many of the miners hadbeen dirt farmers in the East who left farming precisely to look for gold, butwhen they got out here and found what was going on they realized that up inMarin County and out in the Sacramento Valley there were all kinds of placesto grow food, to sell food to the miners as a cash crop. So you had an instantcommercial civilization developing in one fell swoop, starting with a hundredthousand people from the Gold Rush.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was he well educated? Bancroft: No, he was pretty well self-educated. He became very well self-educated. Ihave found as I have read through Literary Industries: [A Memoir] that heliberally quotes people in French and in Latin. He was very well read, and itwas all done on his own, because he only got through half of high school.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, do you want to lead up to the library part of it? [laughter]  Bancroft: Sure. This developed over time. First of all he was trying to do somechronicles, specifically the Handbook Almanac for 1860, and he had a gentnamed William H. Knight working with him. They would try to chronicle oneperiod after another in California history. He would go out and acquirewhatever pamphlets or magazines or newspapers he could find. He graduallybuilt up this shelf of stuff for Mr. Knight who, with him, was trying to do theequivalent of an almanac of this area. One thing led to another, and he waskind of nuts about collecting. He didn’t want to sell anything that he ever got.And he began looking further and further afield to find what he could. Hediscovered in going to Europe and sending some of his agents to Europe that alot of the second sons of wealthy people in England and France and Germanyand elsewhere— The firstborn son always had primogeniture and so wouldinherit whatever the family estate or fortune was. The second sons were welleducated but either had to join the army or fend for themselves. And many ofthem came out here as visitors and kept diaries. He suddenly found, himselfand through his agents, a number of these diaries available in London andBerlin and elsewhere. So one thing led to another, and then he extended hisstudies to go all the way up to Alaska and down to Mexico and as far east asthe Rockies. So he began building up this set of materials, and they started out down onMerchant Street and Montgomery where Tommy Toy’s restaurant is now.Then eventually he got a building at the 721-731 Market Street area, and ashis business grew it wasn’t big enough to house the library and his printingbusiness. Also they were very worried about fires. And so over a period oftime he eventually bought a plot out on Valencia Street, just off Mission.There he built a pretty well fireproofed building in the center of some emptyground with a big fence around it and space—because there were a lot of firesin San Francisco—so that it would be out of harm’s way. This was highlyfortuitous because the big earthquake and fire of 1906 arrived, the fire washalted only a block away from the library building. Meanwhile, he had beennegotiating for some time to sell the library to the University of California.And this was a wonderful story because while the library had been appraisedfor something over $300,000, they had agreed that he would sell it to theUniversity for $250,000. He got quite close to the wire on that, and theycame to him and said, “Mr. Bancroft, we can only raise $150,000. Would youconsider selling the library to us for that?” And he was highly incensed andsaid, “No way! My library is worth $250,000 if it’s worth a penny.” So heanonymously gave $100,000 to the university, and they in due course boughtthe library for $250,000. And that’s how it came to be there [at the Universityof California]. It remained housed on Valencia Street, however, until a weekor so after the 1906 fire whereupon it was hastily transferred to the Berkeleycampus. Of course, it’s a great special purpose library that compares, I think, to theBeinecke [Rare Book and Manuscript Library] at Yale, and a very few others. It’s not a big part of the Berkeley campus but I think it’s an important part ofthe campus and the history. And it’s continued to grow. You know moreabout it than I do because you are there a lot more than I am.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All right, let’s go up through time, starting with your grandparents on bothsides and a little bit about your parents. Bancroft: Okay, well, [Hubert Howe Bancroft] and his second wife, Matilda, had threesons and a daughter. He had been married once before to Emily Ketchum andhad a daughter, Kate, with her. Emily died in 1859. HH married Matilda in1876 and produced the three sons and a daughter at the tail end. He wasalways, unfortunately, more partial to boys than he was to girls, at least that’swhat I found out as I’ve gotten to know various members of the family. Hisoldest son was Paul Sr., who was my grandfather; then he had a slightlyyounger brother, Griffing, and then the youngest brother, Philip. Philip reallymade something of a name for himself as a farmer in the Central Valley. Heran for the US Senate twice and was a well known figure in NorthernCalifornia. My grandfather, Paul, was a supervisor in the City of SanFrancisco, elected either two or three times around 1907, 1909, 1911.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you remember him? Bancroft: Oh yes, I remember him quite well. He was married to a woman namedLouise Hazzard from San Diego. They had just the one son, Paul Jr. Paul Sr.had gone to Harvard, as had his youngest brother, Philip, and he lived andworked in San Francisco, loved fishing and loved poker, as did his youngerbrother Philip. They taught me both fishing and poker at a very early age. It’skind of run in the family. He lived until 1957, because I remember very wellthat he was going to be eighty later that year, and he really wanted to see hisfirst great-grandchild, who would have been my eldest son. He didn’t quitemake it; he died just before that. So that’s why I happen to remember thatyear. It was also the same year that my mother died. She also really wanted agrandson, and that didn’t work either. My grandfather and grandmother livedout in Sea Cliff [a San Francisco neighborhood], and I remember him as akindly, rather taciturn elderly gentleman.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: He was a businessman? Bancroft: More or less. Hubert Howe was very strong, and as often happens, the nextgeneration doesn’t accomplish quite as much. My grandfather was put incharge of managing the Bancroft properties, which included the buildingdown on Market Street and where the Galaxy Theater now is. It was the St.Dunstan’s Hotel in those days, on Van Ness and Sutter. But other than being a supervisor in San Francisco— I have read newspaper clips where heapparently made a significant contribution in helping to get the architect todesign what’s now City Hall, which is one of the better-looking buildings. Ihad not known that until recently. I found that out because Hubert Howe’swife, Matilda, my great-grandmother, kept a diary which I had known nothingabout until my daughter Kim found it recently over at the [Bancroft] library.So Kim and I spent a day going through that diary, and in it there werenewspaper clippings of my grandfather and his contributions to City Hall. Andso, wonder of wonders, I’m learning more as I grow older.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All right, and then your birth and your siblings. Tell me about that generationplease. Bancroft: Well, Dad was an only child, and I was an only child, also. Dad was born in1904, and he lived until 1995. He went east to Yale, not to Harvard, and thenhe worked in New York a good part of his life. I might back around a little bitfor a moment to my mother’s side of the family. They were very Irish. Thefamily name was Manning, and my mother’s grandfather was about the samevintage as my great-grandfather Bancroft. John B. Manning came over fromIreland during the potato famine and worked as a stevedore on the New Yorkdocks. He saved a little bit of money and apparently, I’m told, he investedwhat little he could save in Union banknotes, which during the Civil War wereselling for about ten cents on the dollar because in New York they thought theNorth was going to lose the war. When the North did win the war, why histen-cent-on-the-dollar bank notes were worth a good deal more. So he stoppedbeing a stevedore and went into Wall Street.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh my heavens. Only in America, right? [laughter] Bancroft: Right. The Manning side of the family did rather well, and he was involved insome very interesting things. Among the more interesting was he thought atone point there was going to be a canal built through the Isthmus of Panama.There was a little railroad that ran through there, so he went down through hisconnections in Wall Street, and he bought a major interest in the railroad, sohe had a controlling interest in it. And then a gentleman named [Ferdinand]de Lesseps, who had built the Suez Canal, came along with the Frenchgovernment, and they decided they would like to build the Panama Canal.They came to him and they wanted to buy the stock so they could control therailroad. Well, he had paid about $4 a share for all of the stock that he wasable to get, and he sold it for $200 a share to the French.They tried very hard to build the Panama Canal, and of course they ran intoyellow fever and all of the problems that came up. And so they eventuallyabandoned it, whereupon they dumped the stock back on the market, and he was prescient enough to buy it back again, for the most part at pretty close to$4 a share! And eventually when, under the Teddy Roosevelt regime, Americawanted to build the Panama Canal, he agreed to sell it to the United Statesgovernment for not a penny more or less than he had sold it to the Frenchgovernment. So he sold it a second time for $200 a share. He had seven oreight children, and my Grandfather, Daniel Manning, was one of those. Hewas a stockbroker, but he didn’t do terribly well in life; he went up and downlike a yoyo; he was a speculator.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is this family in New York? Bancroft: They stayed in New York throughout. So my mother, Rita Markoe Manning,was born in New York in 1907 and grew up in New York. She and my fathermet over in Europe in 1927, I think, when he was just getting out of Yale. Hechased her around New York and married her in 1928, and I was born in 1930in New York. And so that’s the story of both sides of my background.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You were born in the middle of the Depression. Bancroft: Right in the middle of the Depression. Yes, my father, when he got out ofYale, started out as a stockbroker, and when the crash hit he ended up sellingcigarettes. He used to walk up and down Broadway every day peddling PhilipMorris cigarettes. I remember it because when I was a young man there was alittle midget dressed in a red suit and a red hat who looked like a bellboy in ahotel, and his name was Johnny [Roventini]. And all the advertising on theradio in those days was, [imitating Johnny] “Call for Philip Morris.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I remember that. Bancroft: Little red hat.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, cocked on the side of his head. Bancroft: So my father brought Johnny dutifully to meet me, and of course Johnny wasabout my size. [laughing] I was like eight or nine years old, and I got a bigwhen I was five years old. And then Dad stayed on in New York, and mymother ended up marrying a fellow named Blair Foster out here.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You were living with your mother?  Bancroft: I was living with my mother for the most part. My stepfather was— Hisfather, Walter Foster, had started with a dentist named George Kleiser, the oldFoster and Kleiser billboard company. And so I grew up with Blair Foster asmy stepfather and my mother, although I visited my father each year.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What was home life like in terms of discipline? What kind of expectationswere there of you? Bancroft: They were pretty tough. They wanted to be sure I wasn’t spoiled since I wasan only child. Particularly as I got into my early teens, they were a little roughon me, particularly my stepfather. When he’d get upset he used to ask mewhat I’d do if he threw me out of the house without a nickel. And of course Ididn’t know what I’d do, but I was determined at that stage of the game I wasgoing to make enough nickels so that I’d be able to take care of myself. And Ilook back on that as probably one of the better things that happened to me,because it gave me a lot of incentive to succeed.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh really. Bancroft: But it was generally a fairly happy home life.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was Yale always in the cards since your father had gone there? Bancroft: Well, my father had gone to Exeter and to Yale, and he was a real bon vivantwho had a lot of fun in life. He didn’t make a whole lot of money, and hewasn’t supporting me as I grew up; I was really being supported by mystepfather. My stepfather had gone to a place called Culver Military Academyin Indiana, and to Stanford. I always wanted to go to Yale. Early in WorldWar II when I was in the sixth and seventh grade— Well, my father was in thenavy in Washington; my stepfather had joined the navy out here andeventually went out to the South Pacific. But I had a feeling all along that if Iwent to my stepfather’s boarding school, Culver, he might pay the freight forme to go to Yale afterwards, even though my father had been to Yale, andthat’s exactly the way it worked out. So I became a lobbyist at a very earlyage.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you have a reason for wanting Yale other than the fact that that’s whatyour father had done? Bancroft: I thought a great deal of it. I saw Dad every summer, and the tales he told meof Yale and his Yale friends that I met I’ve always enjoyed immensely. And I should also say that a very big reason for going there is it just happened to bethree thousand miles away from home. [laughter] So it got me across thecountry. I loved Yale. I didn’t like Culver very much, although it was goodfor me, but I truly loved Yale.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I read that you roomed with Bill [William D.] Witter. [telephone interruption] Bancroft: I had grown up knowing Bill here in San Francisco, and when I got to Yale,my first year I was rooming with three of the people that I had been to Culverwith. But since I knew all them I really wanted to branch out. And Bill grewup in San Francisco and had gone to Hotchkiss; his roommate at Hotchkisshad been a fellow named Brad Dillman who had then come to Yale. And thelast roommate was a fellow named Bob Arnold who had grown up in Seattleand then gone to Lawrenceville. So we all got together at the end of freshmanyear and roomed together for our remaining three years while we were incollege. Bill and I were very close friends and continued that way until theday he died.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did that lead to other business relationships? Bancroft: Yes, Bill and I did some investing together. He is also the one that introducedme to Bessemer Securities, which I would not have known, I don’t think,without Bill getting me in there.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: We have a series of interviews with the Witter family. There’s one with a BillWitter, but it isn’t your Bill Witter. Bancroft: Right, there’s a Chicago Bill, as I called him, William Witter. William D.Witter, who was my roommate, was Dean Witter’s second son. Dean Witterstarted the firm of Dean Witter and Company. His oldest son was DeanWitter, Jr. or Cap, as we called him, and the younger brother was Bill, or myBill, if you will. He worked for Dean Witter for a number of years, and thenleft to start his own firm, with his father’s blessing. I stayed in quite closetouch with him through that period. After Yale and the service, Bill Witterwent to Stanford Business School, and while he was there he roomed withDon Lucas, who later was one of my partners at Draper, Gaither & Anderson.So it’s a small world.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, it certainly is. I’ve noticed all the interconnections among the firstgeneration venture capitalists. What did you major in at Yale?  Bancroft: Mostly the Yale Daily News. I was intrigued with being on the News. I lovedit, and I spent most of my waking time there. My true major was adivisional—sociology, psychology, and literature. But I really enjoyed thenewspaper. Also, while a junior at Yale, several of us started a publicationcalled Careers which we sold during the summers. Well, we sold advertisingduring the summers and then distributed it to colleges, so I guess that was mymain occupation, if you will.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And what was Careers? Bancroft: Careers was a book in which we sold what effectively were full pages, or twopages, of advertising to companies who were recruiting in the Ivy Leaguecampuses. But they didn’t treat it as advertising; they treated it as theopportunity to do an infomercial, if you will. I didn’t know the term in thosedays. They wrote up who they were, what kind of college graduates they werelooking for, and how you should go about applying. And we sold those adsfor $235 a page to all the companies we could find that were recruiting in theIvy League. Then we had the book printed and bound into hardcover anddistributed free of charge to college seniors all through the Ivy League, upand down. It was fun, and we made some pretty nice money out of it. Then wegot broken up by the Korean War, so as soon as I graduated, instead ofcontinuing with Careers, I joined the military.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That must have been a novel idea, was it not? Bancroft: Yes, it was. It kind of came out of the advertising concepts I had practiced atthe Yale News where I used to do New York weekend pages or college skiweekend pages. I would go to the various colleges, mostly girls’ colleges, andwe would go to all the restaurants nearby and get them to do advertising withus to put in the Yale News. The Yale News had five columns. There were twocolumns of advertising on the left and two on the right, and then we’d have acolumn of editorial in the middle. We would use the editorial to write up therestaurants that advertised, of course. It was a good way to spend some timeaway from Yale, to meet girls, and it was quite profitable for the Yale Newsbecause we were getting a lot of money for a one or a two-page ad.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You were more on the business side, right? You were not a journalist writingarticles? Bancroft: No, I was always on the business side, and I ended up being business managerof the News. That and advertising were always the things that I was mostinterested in. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Had it always been in your mind that you were going into business of somesort? Bancroft: Yes, I figured always I was going to be in business, in part because starting atan early age I wanted to make money, and in part because my backgroundthrough my stepfather had been with advertising through the billboards, theoutdoor advertising. So I really kind of thought I wanted to go into anadvertising agency during a lot of this period. Not for sure, but it was kind ofthe area that I was heading in. I didn’t get into the real interest in finance until,really, we started Careers. And at that stage of the game, why some of myfather’s friends who I was talking to said, “You know you really ought to gointo Wall Street because you’ll find that it’ll be much more to your liking thanadvertising.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And that was convincing? Bancroft: Well, it was. With Careers I ended up selling two pages to Merrill Lynch, andI had a grand time doing that. They bought two pages describing their hiringpractices and what have you, and I thought it was a wonderful firm. It turnedout that a man named Bob Magowan, who later became chairman of Safeway,was, at that time, the vice president of marketing for Merrill Lynch. He wasmarried to Doris Merrill, who had been the daughter of Charles [E.] Merrill,who had started Merrill Lynch. My father knew that family well, and so I hadan in to this guy, but I didn’t use it. I went in cold turkey, and it was only afterI had sold the two pages in Careers to Merrill Lynch that the personnelmanager, to whom I had made the sale, introduced me to Mr. Magowan forhis blessing. I didn’t mention the family connection until after he approvedthe sale to Careers. I was always very proud of the fact that I had not used thecontact in order to make the sale. But it made me very partial to MerrillLynch. Many years later when I got out of the service I went back to Merrill Lynch,and that’s where I started.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You graduated from Yale in 1951 and then immediately went to theGeorgetown Foreign Service Institute? Bancroft: What happened was, immediately out of Yale I joined what we’ll call theDepartment of Defense and spent some time with them. They put me throughvarious kinds of training programs. I went down to Fort Benning with them,and eventually I was going to go overseas, and this wasn’t making sensebecause they wouldn’t promise me credit for the draft if I spent three yearsworking as a civilian. I said, “Well, you know, if you’re not going to promise me credit for the draft I think I better quit.” So I did, and I was able to get adirect commission as a second lieutenant in the air force, partly because of theROTC training I’d had at Culver, and partly because of the sort of intelligenceand public relations experience that I’d had in Washington. They sent me toGeorgetown Foreign Service Institute. It was basically a foreign relationscourse at Georgetown Foreign Service Institute. I had a very good time.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And then you went to Korea and Japan, right? Bancroft: I did. I went to Korea and spent all of 1954 there, and at the end of that I wasdue to— If I had come home, I would have had another year under my airforce contract. I learned in Korea that if I transferred to Headquarters Fifth AirForce (Rear), which was in Nagoya, Japan, I could extend my Far East tourfor six months. And when I got home then, in July of 1955, I would get out ofthe service right away, because if you had less than six months left to serve inyour contract they wouldn’t reassign you.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh really. Bancroft: So I thought gee, this is great. By this time I had gotten married to the formerMae Godwin, whom I met in Korea, and so we moved to Nagoya, Japan,where we lived in a little Japanese house for six months while I worked atFifth Air Force Headquarters (Rear) and had a grand time.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What were you doing for the military? Bancroft: In part I was writing propaganda pamphlets. I was also in basically theestimates end of intelligence where you gather all of the stuff that comes in,and you do write-ups for the troops and briefings of the general staff. Where Iended up, I really enjoyed it because there was a major I was working for whohad to brief the commanding general of Fifth Air Force every morning on thenews of the day, but the classified news. I was preparing the briefings forhim. He turned up sick one day so they put me in as the substitute briefer. Iwas shaking in my boots, because I was— By that time I think I was a firstlieutenant, and here I was, giving a three-star general a briefing. This went onfor several days until the major for whom I was working recovered. When hecame back to work the general threw him out and kept me doing the briefings.So the rest of my stay there I had just a fine time. [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So that was a four-year stint between Yale and your getting out of the militaryin 1955?  Bancroft: Yes, I got out of Yale in June of ’51 and I didn’t really have a chance to jointhe business community until late 1955. I spent three years in the air force anda year mucking around with the Defense Department.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And then you went to Merrill Lynch. But briefly [1956-57], right? Bancroft: Well, I went through their training program, and while I was finishing that upmy mother took ill. Actually, after I got out of the service I went on a delayedhoneymoon, because I got married in Hong Kong. My wife had come fromFlorida, but she was stationed in Korea, and we got married in Hong Kong.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So she was in the military? Bancroft: She was also working for the government as a civilian. [chuckling] We met inKorea under the auspices of some friends, and we got married eventually inHong Kong. In November of ’54 my mother and stepfather came out to Tokyoon a visit, and I took what they call an R&R and went to Tokyo, taking myeventually to-be wife there with me, and so she met my parents. I wasthinking seriously about marrying her, and I talked them into staying overfrom Thanksgiving until Christmas; they went to Hong Kong. So we tookanother R&R at Christmastime. We got married in Hong Kong during theChristmas holidays and then moved into the Japanese house in Nagoya. Ienjoyed my service career. In any event, when I got out the following July, wetook a six-month trip around the world. I got a job at Merrill Lynch but thentook a deferral before I went to work while we took the delayed honeymoon.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You got the job at Merrill Lynch without using your in? Bancroft: Well, by using my two pages that I’d sold them years earlier in Careers, I toldthe same head of personnel that I’d like to join Merrill.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, but not using your connection? Bancroft: No. Besides I think Bob Magowan had already joined Safeway by that time.Anyway, while I was in the training program my mother took ill with cancer,here. She had a lung cancer operation, and it didn’t work out very well, so sheonly had a few weeks after that. Merrill Lynch was nice enough to let mework in their San Francisco office while I was here, so I was still technicallytraining. But I would get up at the crack of dawn every day and commute toSan Francisco and do some work in their back office. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now was that routine for financial houses to have a training program for newrecruits? Bancroft: The bigger ones did. Interestingly, my father’s best friend at Yale was afellow named Herbie [George Herbert] Walker, [Jr.] who was the uncle ofPresident Bush I [George H. W. Bush]. He was Bush’s mother’s brother, andhe had a firm in New York called G.H. Walker and Company. I had sold G.H.Walker and Company a page in Careers way back when. And so I went to seeHerbie and said, “I think I’d like to join Wall Street. Can I go to work foryou?” And he said, “Sure you can.” But he said, “Frankly you’d be of a lotmore use to me if you got some training first, and I suggest you go to one ofthe bigger firms where they have a formal training program.” And I said,“Like Merrill Lynch?” He said, “Yes.” I said, “Okay.” So, that’s when I wentto Merrill Lynch.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That must have been your first formal training in finance/business? Bancroft: Yes, other than having been business manager of the Yale News, because thatwas a profit-making organization, unlike most college newspapers.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How much did you learn in the training program? Bancroft: Well, I learned a lot about accounting, because I never took accounting atYale. For a guy that ended up in the investment business that was kind ofdumb. [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But Yale doesn’t have a business school, does it? Bancroft: Oh yes, they’ve got a very good business school. School of Management.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And they did in those days? Bancroft: They did not. It started after that. But my problem was that by the time I mighthave gone to a graduate school, business school, like Harvard or Stanfordwhere most of these people you’ve been interviewing went, I was married andhad spent enough time in the service, and I wanted to go to work. So I decidedI really didn’t want business school. A lot of people have asked me if I missedit, and the answer is, as the years went by I certainly could have used thebreadth that I would have gained there. But on the other hand, as some of your interviewees have said, you kind of pick it up as you go along in the school ofhard knocks.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Don Valentine said in his oral history something to the effect that hedeliberately avoided hiring MBAs. [laughter] So maybe you did just as welldoing it the way you did it. Bancroft: Well, we each have our foibles. If he avoided MBAs— I found through muchof my career when I was looking for people to bring into the companies wewere financing, I would avoid either the East Coast or the West Coast becauseI felt people that grew up in the Midwest had a very fine work ethic, incomparison to many of the people I had known on both coasts. So I was verypartial to hiring people with a Midwest background.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You didn’t stay at Merrill Lynch very long [1956-57]. Bancroft: I finished the training and they put me in an office on Forty-eighth Street. Isold securities for about six months, and I didn’t really like it—largelybecause I had to develop customers, and I had always thought that I mightwant to come back to California some day. But I didn’t want to be dependenton a lot of individuals whom I was selling stocks to. I really wanted to get intowhat we called the buying department in those days, which was theinvestment banking end where the companies would be who you were reallyworking for rather than developing individual clients. I tried to agitate inMerrill Lynch to do that, but they wouldn’t make the change. So I figuredafter I sold securities for six months I’d probably paid them back for thetraining they gave me, and so I thanked them very much and left, and that’swhen I joined [F.] Eberstadt [and Company] downtown [1957-62].<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was it just the way things went that people did the training program and thensold securities? Bancroft: Yes, basically it was a sales training program to turn you into a customers’man or account executive, as they called them then and still do.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And then you end up at Eberstadt, which is an investment—well, they’re bothinvestment banks, aren’t they? Bancroft: But Eberstadt did not have a retail clientele at all. Their business was solelydoing deals for companies. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. Bancroft: Either private placements and raising the money or helping to take thempublic and being the underwriters of the companies going public. And that’swhat I really wanted to do because I figured I’d get into the meat ofbusinesses by doing that. So, Eberstadt was very good; they hired me for a 50percent raise from what I was making at Merrill Lynch.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: They weren’t dismayed by the fact that you had spent a relatively short time atMerrill? Bancroft: No, because they also understood that I had stayed long enough to pay themback for the money they’d put into me.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. And you probably told them why you left. Bancroft: Oh sure, absolutely. I enjoyed Eberstadt immensely. Again, I learned a wholelot because what we were doing there was we would provide financings forcompanies that were trying to raise the money either privately or publicly. Forexample, one of my best jobs at Eberstadt, I was sent out with an associate ofmine, Bradford Mills, to Hawaii, and we got into two of the big five out there,Hawaiian Commercial & Sugar and Alexander & Baldwin. Alexander &Baldwin already owned a good part of Hawaiian Commercial & Sugar andwanted to acquire the balance. Brad Mills did what we call a factual analysisof Alexander & Baldwin, and I did a factual analysis of Hawaiian Commercial& Sugar. And then we wrote them all up into a give or take fifty-page privatememorandum, which is like a prospectus describing everything about thebusiness. Then Brad and I put our heads together and tried to decide what theproper values should be for each company and what ratio should be used forthe one to acquire the balance of the other so that they would merge. We thenwent back and presented our work to Mr. Eberstadt and the other partners whothen refined it to their liking. They would meet with the heads of thecompanies. They were the investment banker who recommend what the termsof the merger ought to be and, in effect, blessed it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you just picking this up? Because you hadn’t had any experience withmergers, and I imagine that’s a pretty complicated thing to do. Bancroft: You learn as go. [chuckling] The writing of the factual report was a way ofreally getting to know the company and getting it all written down andanalyzing everything about it you could. And that put both Brad Mills and meinto a pretty good position to argue with each other what relative value each company might have to the other. Of course we had a lot of help from thepartners we were working for, who showed us where we were crazy or told uswhen we were right. And that’s the kind of thing we did.Another deal was United Artists. There was a company called Ziv TelevisionProductions that did the series on Lassie. Remember when you were a kidthere were all those episodes of Lassie? Well, Ziv was going to be bought byUnited Artists, and United Artists wasn’t sure what kind of price they reallyought to pay. So one of the things I did was to work hard on doing an analysisof Ziv and of United Artists and then presented that to my boss who thenworked on what the terms ought to be. You learn a lot in something like that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now were people higher up becoming impressed with Pete Bancroft? Bancroft: I hope so.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [laughter] Well, you’re not that old, and you haven’t had formal training, andthey could have looked skeptically—is this young man going to really provehimself? Bancroft: That was always an early problem because one of the things that I wasencouraged to do with Eberstadt was to bring in business. You know, inaddition to doing the work of the firm that other partners were bringing in andworking for them, I was encouraged to bring in business. But I was onlytwenty-seven years old, and I looked like a baby then, and I’m told I still dorelative to my age of eighty at the moment. So I looked like I was still prettywet behind the ears, but that’s the way it goes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, by now you have connections, and you come across now, and I’mpresuming then, as a very suave and sophisticated person. Were the socialgraces, that I presume you had then as you do now, oiling the machinerysomewhat and making contacts with people whom you could then do businesswith? Bancroft: Oh I think all of that is very important. I’m reminded of the story years laterwhen I appeared before a panel of students at Yale. I was in the venturecapital business by that time, and in the Q&A after the discussion they said,“What is the most important course that we can take at Yale to prepare us tobe good venture capitalists?” And much to the delight of the dean, and not tothe delight of the students, I said, “Take daily themes so you learn how to readand write in the English language, because if you can’t write and if you can’texpress yourself you can’t sell, and if you can’t sell you’re never going to goanyplace.” I always felt that it was very important to develop the skill of being able to speak in public and to sell and to write. And of course I had donea lot of writing at Yale where I used a lot of adjectives and adverbs and had alot of fun. When I first got to Eberstadt I was asked by my first boss there, one of thepartners, to do a report on a company. I went out and I laboriously— I hadtaken a typing course in high school so I could type, which made me able tonot only write faster but it was more legible. And I came in, and he gave meback the paper the next day. I don’t think there were three or four wordsbetween red [cross-out] lines anyplace, and he said, “Bancroft, what we’reinterested in is nouns and verbs and as few adverbs and adjectives as possible.These are supposed to be factual reports, so go back and make it better.” Ilearned a whole different style of writing, business writing, which was veryhelpful later on in the kinds of reports that I did, and to get the training to helpgo on from there.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It seems from what you’ve told me that you’re already developing a networkof connections, presumably on both coasts. Bancroft: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because you have West Coast family ties, but you’ve now spent quite a bit oftime on the East Coast too. Were you a little unusual in that? Bancroft: I think so. Most of the people that started east, stayed east, and most of thosethat started west stayed west, unless they went to Harvard Business School.But you have seen in the interviews you’ve done with these early venturecapitalists how important Harvard Business School was to them.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. Bancroft: And a lot of that was Georges Doriot, whom I never met because I didn’t gothere. But an awful lot were the connections that they made there that theycould use later on.My father used to tell me as a result of his Yale training in his day that if hewanted to reach somebody in the United States for one reason or another thatusually within three or four phone calls he could find somebody that wouldintroduce him to the person. And also I was brought up— Every Christmasand every time my family had a party, I was made to either give a toast ormake a talk, so I was taught to talk in front of people at an early age, which Ifelt was pretty important. I brought up all my kids the same way. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So the social graces are important for many reasons? Bancroft: Yes, I mean they’re not overriding, but they certainly help.I guess what I should do here is to give you a bit of a segue into what Ithought was lacking in the investment banking field.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, please do. Bancroft: There I found that if we were asked to do a financing for a company, the kindof things I was describing, if we did a good job and it worked, the president ofthe company who we were doing the work for took all the credit. Whatever itwas we were trying to do, like suggesting a merger or what have you, if itdidn’t work then it was my fault. That seemed to me to be the real world butnot necessarily a fair world. The other thing was that you would work for ayear and get a fee, because in investment banking, unlike venture capital, yourfees come from transactions or what you’re paid to do, and—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Above and beyond a base salary? Bancroft: The fees that the firms would get out, of which I was paid a base salary and abonus.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Okay, I see. Bancroft: And so I would find that the first of every new year, the slate was wiped clean.And what are you going to do for me next year [my boss would ask]? So younever built up any credit for what had been done in the past, other than youmight develop a reputation with your boss for having done a good job.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why would a corporation set it up that way? Bancroft: Well, because the investment banking world on Wall Street lived on fees.They were paid fees for doing private placements or fees for taking acompany public. If you have an IPO, an initial public offering, or any kind ofoffering, you might see it in the prospectus—if the stock is sold at $20 pershare, there’ll be a 5 or 6 percent fee, a dollar or $1.20, that goes to theunderwriters, and the balance ($19 or $18.80 per share) would go to thecompany and/or to the selling shareholders. Those fees were what we lived onin the investment banking world. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. I was really thinking more of the slate being wiped clean every year.Nowadays many companies put a lot of emphasis on stock purchase plans,stock options, as a way of keeping and incenting people. It seems to me theopposite thing is happening if every January 1 you’re back at square oneagain. Bancroft: That’s a whole different matter. You’re talking about companies; I’m talkingabout investment banks. They’re just living on fees and—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But they also want to keep people. Bancroft: Well, that’s why they would pay me a nice bonus and give me raises to keepme.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. Bancroft: But anyway, I thought being an investment banker was not particularly goodbecause if I do a good job on behalf of a company, the people in the companywho own the stock in the company are going to be beneficiaries long term,while the investment banker gets only his one time fee and must then go on tothe next deal. I thought if I could be in a position where I could own stock inthe companies that I’m working for, apropos of your mention of optionsgotten by whatever means, then if I do good work the company will prosperand my stock will grow in value.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. Bancroft: So I said I don’t want to be in the investment banking world either; I want tobe in the corporate side, which led me to begin to focus on the beginnings ofventure capital, because this was in a period where it was just getting going.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What year was this? Bancroft: This would have been between 1960, ‘61.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So that’s early for venture capital. Bancroft: That’s when it really kind of began—in the late ‘50s and early ‘60s. 20<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. Bancroft: I would come out here in the summers, when my mother was dying inearly ’57 and every year thereafter, to stay and visit and renew my contacts onthe West Coast. Among them, I made a new friend, Bill Witter’s StanfordBusiness School roommate, Don Lucas.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Okay, here we go. [laughter] Bancroft: So I went down to Draper, Gaither & Anderson, and I was enchanted by whatthey were doing, because they were investing the money that they had intoyoung startup companies. I thought, now this is the right place to be. So Ischmoozed them from 1960 until 1962. They started in 1959, and it was in1962 they finally offered me a job. I came out again in the summer of ’62 andvisited down there and met all the partners: General Anderson, GeneralDraper, Larry Duerig, and Bill Draper, who was General Draper’s son, myage Bill whom you’ve interviewed. I went back to New York hoping thatsomebody would give me a call. The next thing I knew young Bill, my-ageBill, decided he wanted to leave Draper, Gaither & Anderson to form his ownfirm with Pitch Johnson, whom you now know all about from the interviewsyou did with each of them. When Bill left he was leaving a hole in DG&Abecause they had the three senior partners while Bill had been one of theassociates.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, and Gaither had pretty much dropped out, hadn’t he? Bancroft: Well, Gaither had died by then. So you had basically Fred Anderson, GeneralDraper, and a fellow named Larry Duerig, who had been a securities analystwith one of the securities firms out here. I got a call shortly after I got backeast, asking me if I’d like to take over Bill Draper’s accounts and come joinDG&A and become a partner.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you think the number of years that had gone by when you were hopingyou would be invited was simply because there wasn’t a place? They neededsomebody to die or move on. [laughter] Bancroft: Yes. It was a very small field. You know, when you go back to 1959, ’60, ’61,out here you only had Arthur Rock and Tommy Davis. You had someindividuals, Ed [Edward H.] Heller and two or three others as individuals, butalmost nobody else. And when I talked to people in San Francisco aboutSilicon Valley and venture capital, nobody knew anything about them. I meannot Silicon Valley, it was Santa Clara Valley or Palo Alto in those days. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you using the term venture capital? Bancroft: No, it was ‘special situations’ or ‘private investments’, as you’ve been told bysome of the others. That’s what we called them in those days. [tape change] Bancroft: When I was out here, I would start trying to find out about venture capital orspecial situations or that kind of investing down on the [San Francisco]Peninsula. I had some friends that I’d made from growing up who were inMontgomery Street, and I had of course had some time with Merrill Lynch,and so I had some contacts there. I found to my amazement that almostnobody in San Francisco knew anything about Hewlett or Packard or thecompany Hewlett-Packard. And they had no interest in what was going ondown in the Peninsula.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How do you explain that? Bancroft: Because San Francisco was very insular. Through Blyth & Company andDean Witter, they had their financings, and they were interested in Hawaii,and they were interested in lumber products, and they were interested in thekinds of things that had been their traditional businesses.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see, none of this tech stuff. Bancroft: The whole idea of this thing going on down there—that’s very dangerous. Theonly one that I knew who knew anything about it and said, yes, it’s kind ofinteresting, was Bill [William K.] Bowes. My interest there sparked at a veryearly time; it was in 1960, ‘61.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, that’s early. Bancroft: My father had known Tommy Davis, and I think Davis & Rock started in1961. So it was suggested that maybe I ought to try to meet Tommy or talk toTommy or meet Arthur [Rock]. But I had known Don Lucas, and so it seemedto me that Davis & Rock were just starting up, but Draper, Gaither &Anderson was already fully fledged from 1959. So that’s where I kept headingback to, and they finally came around in 1962. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was anybody talking to you about the risks of venture capital? Yourexperience so far in the financial world had been with pretty conservativeinstitutions. Was it running through your mind that there is opportunity here,but there’s also great risk? Bancroft: Well, all through this period I felt that some of the younger companies I knewanything about might be higher risk, but they were higher opportunity. Andsomewhere along the line, I evolved the rationale in my mind that if you standa ruler on edge, and if six inches is an equilibrium, if you dare as high asseven you might fall as low as five. And that’s going to be it. If you shoot forten or twelve you might end up at zero, but if it works it’s going to be prettyexciting. So I clearly understood the concept of risk.There was a classmate of mine at Yale named Carl [W.] Knobloch, [Jr.] whohad gotten early into a company that went through several metamorphoses,but it ended being in the shell home business, U.S. Shell Homes. They wantedto go public, and I thought maybe that was the first company I could bringinto Eberstadt. Instead, Hayden, Stone walked away with the deal, and therejust happened to be a fellow named Arthur Rock at Hayden, Stone at thatpoint. Carl Knobloch and I remained friends forever. But you know Eberstadtwasn’t really prepared to risk that kind of underwriting, but Hayden, Stonewas. So I knew there were firms that were willing to do it, and the conceptappealed to me.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, you said in the context of not wanting to be dependent on yourstepfather that you wanted to make money. Was there more to it than theindependence that risk investment represented? Bancroft: Not at that point. That came later. You know, the joy of helping to start acompany and watching it grow and develop, and helping to create jobs andwatching companies grow like a baby, and the thrill that comes from thatcame later. Early on it was providing financing money for companies andlearning how companies work and what you need to do to get the money forthem.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What about the motivation of providing for your wife—and you have at leastone child by now? Do you have more? Bancroft: Yes, ’57 I had my first one, a son Brad. In ’58 the second one, a daughterKim. Then in ’60 the third one, a son Stephen. We were more prolific than wereally meant to be. [laughter] Then I had a fourth one in 1962, Gregory, not toleave him out. [chuckling] Yes, well, that was all part of my motivation. Iwasn’t trying to make money for the sake of sitting there and counting it; I wanted to have it so that I would have complete financial independence, lead acomfortable life and could educate my kids. When I was with Draper, Gaither& Anderson, I used to have lunch with my stepfather periodically. One day Iwas able to take him to the Woodside Pub, buy him lunch, and tell him thatthe previous year I made more money than he had ever made in a year. And sofrom now on he wasn’t going to be a stepfather, but I hoped he’d be a friend.We ended up being very good friends. So that all played into the motivations.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Let’s get back to Gaither, Draper & Anderson. What did you find when youarrived? Bancroft: I found an interesting hodgepodge of investments that they were making.Mostly individuals, Don Lucas or Crawford Cooley or General Andersonwould find something, and they’d go into it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Not necessarily high tech? Bancroft: It was more high tech than not, but not necessarily, unlike many of your otherinterviewees who stuck with high tech. I inherited a couple of companies fromBill Draper. One was a very mundane company that made different kinds oftoilets and things down in Los Angeles, and the other was Corbin-Farnsworth,which has been mentioned to you by several of your interviewees, that wasmaking defibrillators. I have noticed in some of your interviews there havebeen differing stories about Corbin-Farnsworth from different people, likefour blind men looking at an elephant, trying to describe it. The true story ofCorbin-Farnsworth was I inherited it from Bill and went on the board.We got to the point where we really needed some money, and we needed ahome. They made very good defibrillators but they didn’t have the marketing.And so we had to find a place to put the company. We looked at all of thedrug, pharmaceutical, instrument-type companies and determined that Smith,Kline & French might very well be the best fit. But nobody knew anybody inSmith, Kline & French, and having been in the investment banking business, Ididn’t really want to pay a fee to an investment banker for the introduction.I’d been in that business. So I got out the Standard and Poor’s directory, and Ilooked up all the officers in Smith, Kline & French. It turned out that the vicepresident of marketing was the youngest senior officer they had. So I said tomyself, the youngest senior officer and in marketing in particular is probablythe right guy. So I called his secretary cold turkey and eventually arranged tomeet him, and eventually Smith, Kline & French bought the company. Theonly reason I claim more accurate knowledge than some of the others isbecause they were only peripheral shareholders, while I was on the board atthat point, having inherited Bill Draper’s position, and I was responsible forselling the company. Both company founders, Messrs Corbin and Farnsworth were fine upstanding people, and they made fine defibrillators. Fortunately,Smith, Kline & French could see that and bought the company.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You picked Smith, Kline because you could see that the defibrillator that youwere trying to sell would fit— Bancroft: Their product line. It seemed to be a very good fit with some of theinstruments that they were selling, better than a lot of other companies.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And did it work out for Smith, Kline? Bancroft: Yes, it worked out very well.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I’m reading into what you’re saying that Corbin-Farnsworth was kind of aproblem child before you sold it? Bancroft: Well, it was a problem child only because of the unavailability of ongoingfinancing. Sixty-two to ‘67 was a rotten market, as you’ve heard from others.We couldn’t really take companies public, and there was no exit for thiscompany, and it needed to grow. We had very limited capital ourselves atDraper, Gaither & Anderson. Another company they had was one called Electro-Engineering. I inherited theboard seat from Bill. There was an interesting old Swede, Wally Wahlgren,who had started it and was running it, and he had a plant up in Forestville.DG&A had made the mistake of taking a minority position in a companywhere the founder and chairman owned a majority of the stock—and youcouldn’t budge him. And so I learned from that before I began investingmyself, never [with emphasis] get involved where the individual founder of acompany is running it and where you are completely at his mercy, becauseonce in there’s no way out. I was asked by General Anderson to find an exit,so I did something I really don’t much like to do. Every board meeting I wentto I made myself so obnoxious that he eventually wanted to get rid of me, sohe had the company buy in our stock. [laughter] Bill Bowes characterized itpretty well.DG&A was the earliest, true venture capital partnership on the West Coast inthe form that most venture capital firms are still now run, where you have thegeneral partners and then some limited partners putting up the capital. Thegeneral partners collect a fee, a small percentage of the money invested tocover their overhead, and get 20 percent or so of the profits, to the extent thatthere are profits. That’s been the mold in which most venture capital firmshave developed. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And where did that come from? Who invented it? Bancroft: I think that came out of Ed [Edwin E.] Huddleson, [Jr.] who was one of theprincipal lawyers at Cooley, Godward & Huddleson, San Francisco. EdHuddleson was General Anderson’s lawyer and just a wonderful man.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did he have a model for it in another industry? Bancroft: I think they kind of invented this thing.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Really! Bancroft: I don’t know. By the time I got there the firm had been founded, so I knewabout it. But I just have given him credit because General Anderson alwayssaid he was the sharpest knife in the drawer, as far as being a lawyer wasconcerned. And I thought he was a very bright lawyer who cut through to thebusiness end of things instead of getting lost in red tape.DG&A itself was not really terribly successful. It was a great learning period,and I learned a lot from ‘62 to ‘67 while I was there. Then the firm broke upbecause in the middle of it General Draper really wanted to leave, retire.General Anderson got lung cancer, and so he died in 1967 or thereabouts. Butwe broke up the firm, and it hadn’t really made a lot of money. We did okay,but not by the standards that later developed.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But it did well enough that Pete Bancroft was bitten by the venture capitalbug, right? Bancroft: Very seriously. My main memory arising from DG&A is one of thecompanies we invested in called Mark Systems. It was a little company thatdeveloped a camera, a very high-tech camera, for spy planes, where from fiftythousand feet you could read the license plate of a car in a parking lot below.Of course it was highly classified, and they also developed stabilized optics,where if you hold something you don’t shake, which they now have, tovarious degrees, in all kinds of cameras. But they were an early forerunner ofall this. We invested in them as a startup somewhere around 1962. I put a little bit ofmoney in. General Anderson had the lovely habit of lending money to DonLucas, Crawford Cooley, and myself so that we could make largerinvestments. I put in money at $1 a share, and with some help from GeneralAnderson, I ended up with fifty thousand shares at a buck a share. What really gave me the taste for the venturing business came when I wasdown in Cabo San Lucas with Bill Edwards and his first wife Betty and two orthree other people on a vacation. We flew down in a light plane, and therunway ran from the sea up a hill. You would come in and land at the sea end,go uphill, and figure you could stop by the time you got to the end of therunway. And when you left, you would get to the top of the hill, you’d turnaround, and you’d go like hell down there hoping you’d be airborne by thetime you ran out of runway. But it was a great, great vacation.While I was there Mark Systems had its IPO. It was one of the very fewcompanies that in 1964 went public. I got a telegram saying the IPO wenteffective—that was the term we used in the trade—went effective at $8,opened at $24. It was like many of those young companies when they arebeing well received; the underwriters underpriced it so that the people whobought the stock in the initial offering paid $8, but the extra demand was suchthat it immediately starting trading at $24. Well, I figured if I had fiftythousand shares at $24, that was $1.2 million, so I had made a million bucks,which of course I hadn’t necessarily made, because you couldn’t sell it.[chuckling] But the bug bites pretty hard when that happens.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, that’s pretty dramatic evidence. Bancroft: So I bought a lot of drinks for everybody in Cabo San Lucas.The sequel to that story is, a number of years later a lot of competitiondeveloped and Mark Systems was not holding its own. By this time the stockwas up at $40 a share or so. I had joined Bessemer [Securities] by that timeand was no longer close to Mark Systems. There were investment companiesin the marketplace who would buy investment letter stock, which was stockthat you couldn’t sell except privately, and they in turn couldn’t sell so they’dbuy it at very steep discounts. I sold a big chunk of what I had to one of thesefunds at $30 a share when it was trading at $42, and I never looked back.Unfortunately, some of the people in the company, like so many people in somany companies down there in Silicon Valley, instead of selling a portion oftheir holdings when they could, they’d go to a bank and borrow money basedon the stock’s then value in the marketplace, and buy a boat or a new home orwhat have you. Eventually many of these stocks would go to hell in a handbasket when the companies didn’t proper so well. The people who borrowedinstead of selling would have to pay back the banks in real money, and theydidn’t have the collateral to do it—not unlike houses that today are worth lessthan the mortgage on them. So I saw at first hand what happened to some ofthe officers who went that route, which taught me a lifelong lesson: don’t getoverleveraged. recession with many homeowners under water]. Bancroft: Yes, well we’ve been through several ups and downs in the market since.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Can we call Draper, Gaither & Anderson the first true venture capital firm? Bancroft: I think it was that on the West Coast. American Research & Development,started by Doriot, was first on the East Coast. And there were various familyinvestors—the Rockefellers were investing, the Phippses were, and later JockWhitney, among others.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, but they were private individuals. Bancroft: Yes, but I mean it’s the same kind of business in that they are investing inearly stages of start-up companies. But the true limited partnerships, whereothers would supply the money and the practitioners would be the generalpartners, I think DG&A was the first one on the West Coast, along with Davisand Rock, which started in 1961.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: In 1967, DG&A came to an end. Bancroft: Right, and we gave all the assets back to the people who put money in.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you worried? Bancroft: Was I worried about it?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. You essentially didn’t have a job. Bancroft: That’s fine. You know we’re all optimists in the venture capital business. Ithink you’ve been told that by everybody you’ve interviewed. [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, that’s true. Bancroft: We were sure we were going to find a way to go. I was immediately offeredtwo jobs, one with Eastman, Dillon. I then went east to see Bill Witter, whoI’d stayed in touch with, and he said I ought to go and talk to a guy named Jack [John M.] Kingsley, who was running Bessemer Securities, because theyhad a venture operation. So I did, and fortunately I was offered a job in both.But there was one big difference: at Eastman, Dillon I would have had tosolve both ends of the equation, meaning I would have had to find thecompanies to invest in, and then I would have had to go to the local partnersand get them to agree to invest. So I was both putting the deal together andfinding the capital. Whereas, on the other hand, Bessemer had the moneybecause they were a fairly well-funded private company from whichinvestment funding was always available. So at Bessemer I would only haveto solve one side of the question. I had to convince my boss at Bessemer,and/or the board of directors at Bessemer to make the investment. But if theydecided to, the money was already in place. So I said to myself, gee, I’d a lotrather only have to solve half the equation than the whole equation. So Ijumped at joining Bessemer and moved east.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did Bessemer Securities think of itself as doing risk capital investment? Bancroft: Yes. Bessemer at the time I joined it was worth perhaps $400 million. Andabout 60 percent of it was in marketable securities like their own mutual fund.About 20 percent was in real estate, and the other 20 percent was in so-calledprivate investments, half of which was in shipping in Norway and otherthings, and the other half, or about 10 percent, was in so-called high risk.When I joined to take over their venture capital, I was in charge of what wecalled the high-risk/high-return portfolio.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So they were hiring you as what we would call today a venture capitalist? Bancroft: They were hiring me to be the equivalent of what a general partner is in aventure capital partnership. They were supplying the money, and I wasfinding a place to put that segment of their money, which was the high-riskend of it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Corporations maybe a few decades earlier might have been in securities butwould not have been in risk investment. Is that a new—service isn’t quite theword—a new corporate operation? Bancroft: A new activity. Yes, most of that for most corporations came along later.Remember, I said earlier the Rockefellers and the Phippses and Jock Whitneyand AR&D were among the very few in the East who would undertake to dohigh-risk investments. Laurance Rockefeller started Eastern Airlines. Beforethat there was no high-risk capital available except from a few individualswho were wealthy. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I get it. The question I was trying to ask is, banks, corporations, whatever,looked at what was happening on the West Coast and decided they should getinto venture capital investment because it might pay off? Bancroft: That came along in the seventies and early eighties when the insurancecompanies. For example, Reid Dennis out here was working for Fireman’sFund until he broke away. They were among the few corporations that weredoing this kind of risk investment. In one of your interviews, somebody wastalking about corporations like Intel and others setting up a venture capitalarm. For the most part, their interest in doing it was to fund some developingresearch or products that they might be able to integrate into their own majorline of activity.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It was a different purpose, wasn’t it? Bancroft: Different purpose—which was very true. We were scared to death of havingcompanies like that come in. I’m wearing my venture capital hat when I saythat, because the venture capital part of an Intel or another company was verysmall, and nobody had—that wonderful expression that I’ve known all my lifebut you professed not to know until a year ago—their skin in the game.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, I had never heard it before. Bancroft: Individuals at these venturing organizations had their own money invested andhad everything to lose if the investment didn’t work out. If you don’t havesomething to lose, you don’t pay the same attention that you do otherwise. Sowe never wanted to have large corporations with us in anything we did atBessemer, largely for that reason. It all came to pass a little bit later on,particularly after ERISA [Employee Retirement Income Security Act] came inin the mid-to-late seventies.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, but you went to Bessemer in 1967, and you went to do venture capital.So the powers that be at Bessemer Securities hired you for what I’mimagining is a new activity. Bancroft: They had been doing it; the Phippses had been doing it. Remember Bessemeris just an extension of the Phipps family.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, I see. I forgot that connection. 30 Bancroft: The Phippses and the Rockefellers and Jock Whitney.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But they were unusual, right? Bancroft: Very. How Draper, Gaither & Anderson really got started is because FredAnderson was a very close friend of Jock Whitney’s, and Jock Whitneyoperated a—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So this was going through the family, so to speak. Bancroft: Sure, exactly. That’s really what it was.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It’s not a widespread phenomenon at all. Bancroft: No. Reid Dennis had a slight offshoot because Fred [H.] Merrill, whom hewas working for at Fireman’s Fund, encouraged him to put a little of his ownmoney into the little deals he was finding. That was very rare, very rare.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And nobody worried about the ethics of that? I’m trying to think if there evenis an ethical component. I guess you could argue the opposite: that if you’rewilling to put your own money in, it shows your good intentions. Bancroft: Well, I can give you two good examples, I think, going directly to your point.In the case of Reid with Fred Merrill, the deal was if there was going to beless than a total of $50,000 going into something, Fireman’s Fund wouldn’ttouch it, because the fund was so big that it couldn’t bother itself to invest$50,000. If the investment was to be $250,000 or more, then Fireman’s Fundwanted to take a look at it. If it’s going to be less than that, you [Reid] take it.In the case of Bessemer, the deal I made with them was look, I want to put myown money into everything that I’m bringing to you, and you’ve got to allowme to have a piece of it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That was your upfront negotiation? Bancroft: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: This is what I need to come to Bessemer.  Bancroft: Right, and they said, “Well, why should we do this? Because you’re takingmoney away from what we might be investing.” In other words, “If we’regoing to put $400,000 into a company and you take $25,000 of it, that onlyleaves us $375,000.” And my argument to them was, “Hey guys, wouldn’tyou rather have this little pipsqueak who’s working for you putting up what isa lot of money to him and betting on the same thing that he’s betting yourmoney on? Shouldn’t you feel safer doing that than if I said, ‘Oh I’m going toput your money in, but I’m not going to put any in; I just want a salary?’”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And they bought that argument? Bancroft: They bought that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You now had your own personal nest egg, right? Bancroft: From Mark Systems. I could put $25,000 apiece into the various things Irecommended to Bessemer, and I did.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you think the fact that you were putting some of your nest egg into it madea difference in how you went about investments? Bancroft: Absolutely! If I hadn’t been able to put my own money in, I wouldn’t havebeen interested in doing it, for one.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, but you would have found another situation. Bancroft: But I wasn’t interested in that. I was interested by this time in developingcompanies, because I’d watched Mark Systems, and that’s what I wanted todo. And my condition for doing it was that they cut me in. Now there weretwo stages here of people being cut in. In the first stage, like what I’m talkingabout, Bessemer permitted me to put my own money in alongside theirs. AndI’d get X shares of stock, and they’d get Y shares. They didn’t have thecarried interest of a partnership—that developed through Draper, Gaither &Anderson, and Bessemer didn’t do a partnership for many years, until after Ileft. They allowed people to put money in. The partnership says, in effect, youput up the money; we’ll invest it, and we get 20 percent of the profits, you get80 percent. That’s another way of cutting in the people that are doing thework. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So was your piece of the action then just the fact that you were allowed toinvest? Bancroft: That was all I had most of the time I was there.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And did they put a ceiling on that? Bancroft: No, because the size deals we were doing, I never could compete. [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So they didn’t need to. [laughing] Bancroft: No, they didn’t need to. What eventually happened, the next stage atBessemer was, instead of creating a partnership, they loaned me some moneyto invest in these deals, when we were doing more and more of them as timewent on. So I was using their borrowed money. The arrangement I had withthem was that at the end of the year we would see how Bessemer was doing,and if I hadn’t made my goals for Bessemer, which was another whole issue,then the first thing they’d do was cut any bonus that they were going to giveme, and if I had done worse they would cut my salary.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: There was quite a lot of pressure there? Bancroft: Yes, and you know I thought that was fine, which is part of the reason I’m sodamn mad at all these CEO compensations today. Their companies losemoney, and they make millions. I was always tied to how well I did forBessemer. The better I did for them, the better I did for myself, which seemedto me fair.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that an unusual arrangement at that time? Bancroft: Highly. And that evolved, after I retired, into setting up Bessemer VenturePartners as a true partnership in which Bessemer invested. Bessemer VenturePartners still operates out of Palo Alto. So it has evolved like most of the otherlimited partnerships now.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What would you call the original arrangement at Bessemer? Bancroft: Well, I was allowed to invest with my own money. And if they made money, Imade money. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, but they were going to dock you if you didn’t do well. Bancroft: No, not at that point. They didn’t lend me money until I had been there a fewyears.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, you said that. Bancroft: My first few years, stage one, was I co-invested with them in everything I putthem into. If they made ten times their money, I made ten times on my money.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why did venture capital go the partnership route? Bancroft: The reason it did is because more and more money was being required to gointo companies as the industry grew, and the general partners didn’t have thatkind of money themselves.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. Bancroft: The partnership concept grew so that they could raise many millions ofdollars, and the general partners would get a fee of 1 percent or 1.5 percent. Itfinally got up to 2 or 2.5 of the money you put in, just to operate, to open thedoors in the morning. And if a company was bought for $1 million and soldfor $3 million, that meant there was a $2 million profit, and 20 percent of thatprofit would go to the general partners, and the other 80 percent would go tothe limited partners. That’s the traditional way that these things havedeveloped, and that’s good except that, as with anything, people got greedy,and they began raising more and more money as the industry grew. Theybegan demanding more and more fees. And it finally evolved, unfortunately,to the point where the venture capital partnerships were investing so muchmoney that with the fees they were getting, the 1 percent to 2.5 percent of theassets, that they were making more money that way than they were on theprofits that were being made when the investments were sold. It meant thatthey were really starting to lose sight of really making money on thecompanies they were investing in. Which is why Arthur Rock and others aresaying the world has kind of gone topsy-turvy today—I don’t mean today, butup until recently.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: If I’m understanding you right, venture capitalists operating in this new waywere making enough on the fees so that they didn’t have to worry quite asmuch about the success of the company. Your generation, almost everybody, puts a lot of emphasis on venture capitalists not just investing money—it’salso building companies. Bancroft: Right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Doesn’t a lavish fee structure discourage people from helping to manage thecompany? Bancroft: What happens is you get bigger and bigger and make more and moreinvestments. You don’t have the time or necessarily the degree of interest infollowing progress. Because if you’re getting a big fee each year irrespectiveof what happens—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, that’s what I mean. Bancroft: But you’re getting 20 percent of the profits. If there are no profits, you get noprofits. But that of course works totally against the interests, or should, of thelimited partners who put up the money.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is that problem fundamental to the bubble bursting? Bancroft: I think it plays a very big part in it. Plus the fact that the pendulum alwaysgoes too far in one direction or another, and things go in fads. The market willgo crazy for one kind of investment for a while, and then nobody wants it, andit’ll go back. There are always these swings.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: This is skipping up to the present time but that’s where the conversation tookus, at least in my mind— Bancroft: You’re the leader. [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you think that there is a silver lining to the recession and that people willstart examining behavior? Bancroft: Absolutely, there always has been before, and there is right now. I waslistening the other night down at the Western Association of VentureCapitalists meeting that now there are deals begging. Prices to buy have comeway down because entrepreneurs can’t raise money because the venturecapitalists don’t have any liquidity. Venturers are now beginning to see abetter climate to invest than they have in a long time. So it always goes that way. When we get talking about the NVCA [National Venture CapitalAssociation], I’m going to trace for you the period from ’69 through the midseventies to the end of the ’70s, and we ought to do that in another session.The statistics are fascinating as to what happened and how the industry almostdisappeared and why it came back.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, I want to hear that.I read that Bessemer Securities had something called the anti-portfolio. Doesthat mean anything to you? Bancroft: No. Within Bessemer Venture Partners they used to carve out some moneythat they could invest in public companies that had become orphans in themarket. I’ve never heard the term that you just referred to.After some period of time I changed jobs, and you probably don’t want to gointo that because that’s the latter part of my life where I became president ofpercent or so of the assets were in high-risk investments, and then there wasreal estate that produced ordinary income. The main body of money wasinvested in marketable securities. Bessemer is owned by a number of trusts,the beneficiaries of whom are members of the Phipps family. The way itworked was that the venture capital or high-risk portfolio was supposed togenerate the greatest compound rate of return. That’s what it’s meant to be,and if it doesn’t do it you ought to get fired, and if it does you get a pat on thepopo. The real estate created a lot of the income because they were mostly init for income, and you got dividends from the marketable securities portfolio.The older members of the Phipps family get the dividends each year.Whatever capital gains are made is reinvested so it will grow for futuregenerations. So that was the operating motif of Bessemer.And you know, all during the time that I was there in charge of the high-riskinvestments, we were generating a return of around 30 percent a year on thatpart of the portfolio, which was a much higher rate of return than you get onreal estate or on marketable securities. The challenge I always was given wasthat every year I ought to be able to increase—this is after I was president—the net income of Bessemer which is paid out to the beneficiaries by a rategreater than inflation. And every year I should increase the underlying valueof the stock at a rate greater than the growth in the S&P 500. Those were thebogeys that I had.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You made those the criteria? Bancroft: Well, I agreed to them when they made me president and set me up. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So they were setting them and you were agreeing to them? Bancroft: Yes, we were negotiating it. But that was my bogey, and that was how I wasbasically compensated, or not. I was telling you earlier about how they couldcut into my bonuses and salary.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did that ever happen? Bancroft: No, actually that was one of the reasons I retired when I did as president, in1988, because I’d had eleven or twelve straight years of its working well, andI thought gee, I’m not sure I can keep this up forever. [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Get out while the getting’s good. Bancroft: Besides I was getting old enough. I really by this time wanted to work formyself rather than work for somebody else. So that’s why I stepped down.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How was it to shift from Draper, Gaither & Anderson to Bessemer? You weretrying to adapt, I would think, to a whole tradition of investment through thePhipps family. There must have been a long history of expectations. Bancroft: Yes, well, they were a corporation, Bessemer Securities Corporation. Thepresident was a fellow named Jack Kingsley, and I worked directly for him.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So the Phipps family was in the background? Bancroft: They were the directors, and behind them the shareholders. So we had anumber of Phippses on the board with whom I interacted. The chairman ofthe board was always a member of the Phipps family, but they always had anoutsider as president. Henry Phipps, when he set it up in the beginning, saidhe wanted to have this thing set up to run for the benefit of his heirs. Theyshould always supervise what was going on with their money, but that it wasbasically better to have a stranger running the company because it’s a loteasier to fire a stranger than it is to fire a cousin, which is absolutely right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And maybe a little distance is good too. Bancroft: Yes. So they had a long history. Jack Kingsley was not a member of thefamily. I worked for him until he retired, and then for his successor, Tom Keesee, for a couple of years, and then they made me president. So then I hadthe venture capital group working for me the last twelve years I was there.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, you certainly moved up the ladder. Was it more than year after year youwere bringing in good money? What were they looking at? Bancroft: Why did they make me president?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. Bancroft: The guy who had been made president, my immediate predecessor, was notworking out to their satisfaction. They had offered me the job after JackKingsley’s retirement, but I said I really didn’t want it because I was veryhappy running the venture capital end of things. They then said two yearslater, when things weren’t working out with Tom, “Well, if you don’t want it,we’re going to go on the outside and hire somebody to come in.” At thatpoint, I had been there from 1967 through until 1976, and I had several peopleworking for me in the venture capital end; I had my entire net worth investedin that part of the firm. I was frankly scared to death that if they broughtsomebody in from the outside, he might not understand the culture, and hemight want to do something on this venture capital end that I didn’t wanttinkered with. So I said okay, I better take it. So that’s why I accepted the joband became president.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. Now you were into yet a whole new realm of endeavor in a sense. It’sthe same company, yes, but you’re now president, so how did you get up tospeed? Bancroft: Well, I knew a lot about marketable securities because I had been in thesecurities business on and off all my life. I didn’t know much about realestate, but I thought there was a very good man there who could run the realestate, and a guy that was not so good that was running it at the time. That waswhy my predecessor ended up retiring. So as soon as I got in, I got rid of theguy who was running the real estate and put in the gent I thought could do agood job, and he did a very good job. So you basically delegate.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you do that easily—fire people? Bancroft: I never fire people easily; that’s been a very difficult thing to do. Butdelegating I don’t mind. To me there’s a difference between delegating andabdicating. If you delegate, you want to keep an eye on what they’re doingand stay in close touch. If you abdicate, you say okay it’s your baby, you run it, and I never believe in abdicating. But see, I became president during theCarter years, and I thought Carter micromanaged the whole bloody countrypractically to a standstill, which we’ll talk about when we get into this other—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, but he came up with some policies that you must have liked. Bancroft: Congress did; he didn’t.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, well, true. Bancroft: Anyway, I didn’t find it difficult to delegate, and I had to, unfortunately, getrid of a number of people who had started companies that we invested inbecause they couldn’t grow with the companies. My favorite story about thatis: you start with a string quartet, and the lead violinist is the leader, and youplay wonderful music. But as you grow and develop an orchestra, you’ve gotto bring in other instruments and other help, and the leader of the stringquartet often cannot grow into becoming your conductor. At that stage of thegame you’ve got to find a conductor or else, to use my favorite expression,you end up with cacophony instead of a symphony.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But it seems to me that critics could have said that about Pete Bancroft. Bancroft: Sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because up until now, you’ve had responsible positions, but they’ve beenpretty well defined. And now you were head of the show. Bancroft: Well, if it hadn’t worked, I’m sure they would’ve gotten rid of me.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, but I imagine you also had to learn some new skills. It was not enough toknow venture capital now. So what happened? How did you do it? Bancroft: I learned, I guess I learned, because it worked! [laughter] If you’re capable ofgrowing and willing to grow and eager to grow, you do. And I had a downsideto protect, which was I had Bill [William T.] Burgin and Neill [H.]Brownstein running our venture capital at that point. And I had anotherseparate venture capital operation in Brad Mills, the person that I originallywent to Honolulu with to do the study way back in Eberstadt days. They werebeing provided money by Bessemer for new investments, into which I wasalso investing, and I wanted to be sure that they continued to keep being provided the money. I knew that I understood the venture capital fieldbecause I had been in it a long time, and the other was frankly easier, Ithought. We had good people running marketable securities, and I knew wehad a good man able to run the real estate, so it was just a question—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you delegated. Bancroft: Yes, absolutely.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you think you were breathing down the necks of the people running theventure capital operation because that had been your baby? Bancroft: The question is did they think so—and the answer is no. Because at one stageof the game after I became president, they said, “You know, something mighthappen to you, and we may be better off forming a partnership, a limitedpartnership, like all the rest of these folks have, because if something happensto you and your successor doesn’t like us, Bessemer might not go on investingwith us.” So I said, “You’ve got a point.” I went to Dinny [Ogden Mills]Phipps, the chairman, and I said, “These guys would like to consider settingup a partnership so that there are outside investors besides Bessemer.” Hesaid, after a lot of thought, “Okay, if they really want to, we’ll go that way.”So I went back to them and said, “Guys, okay, if you want to go out and findoutsiders to invest, and if you think they’ll be as easy to work with asBessemer, we’re willing to go that way.” And they thought about it and cameback and said, “No, we don’t want to”.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh really. Bancroft: Later on they formed a partnership after I retired.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why did they say no? Bancroft: Well, when they were told they could, they were empowered to be able to.The reason they then didn’t is because they were perfectly happy with thearrangement with Bessemer, because if they had good investments to make, Iwas always able to get the money from the board for them. Now, had theymade bad investments, I wouldn’t have been able to get more money from theboard, and had we done enough of those, the board would have had my head.Very simple.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You were there twelve years— 40 Bancroft: Yes, as president. I actually joined Bessemer in ’67, and I retired as presidentin 1988 and stayed on until 1992.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh right, it’s longer than twelve, isn’t it? Bancroft: Yes. I had twenty-five years with them.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It’s the second interview with Paul Bancroft III, better known as Pete. And itis April 7, 2010. We’re going to focus this time on venture capital per se,having spent the first interview on your previous career. I’ll start with theclassic question which is, what do you consider to be the most importantaspect to look at when you are considering a possible investment in acompany? Bancroft: Oh, I think really much the same as everybody else: the people and the qualityof the people and the qualifications of the people are really the thing thatmatters the most. Like almost everybody else in the field in the early days andstill today, I spend a lot of time with the entrepreneur, or would-beentrepreneur, who comes in seeking investment—trying to learn what makeshim tick, trying to learn about his ethics and his drive and his motivation andhis abilities and his qualifications. And, almost as important, has he got ateam? And if he does, how do they blend and mesh with him? When it all comes together, then you look at the business plan. Actually to beperfectly honest, you usually look at the business plan first to find out whetherit makes any sense or not. Somebody who writes a business plan that has himdoing $1 million in sales the first year and $100 million the second year with a50 percent profit margin clearly has never run a business and isn’t qualified torun a business. So if that’s the kind of business plan that we get, why weusually say goodbye to them before even going on. But assuming the businessplan makes sense, then the people are terribly important.The other thing is the size of the potential market. If you have somebodywho’s going to spend years designing the finest gold-plated widget that everhappened, but when it is designed and ready to go there’s only a market forten or fifteen of them, clearly that isn’t something that any venturing companyought to back. So I think in the early days you needed to be reasonably certainthat the market was at least $100 million potentially and hopefully severalhundred million.  And then when you get through the people and the market and the businessplan, I guess the next thing is you check out the technology as best we could.Like many of my fellows in the field, I was not a technologist, so we’d have togo find somebody to— As I used to like to say, has this person reinventedKleenex? Or has he really got something new? And then you want to checkthe potential competition. Who else is out there? Is he in the forefront? If thereare already three companies engaged in this technology, you probably don’twant to back a fourth one; it’s better to have the first or the second in the field. You put all of those things together and spend as much time getting to knowthe person as you can, and eventually go home and sleep on what you’velearned. I used to wake up at four o’clock in the morning, and somethinginside would either say okay let’s go with this, or no, I don’t think so; we’dbetter turn it down. Eventually the decision is made based on one’s instinct,and of course what is your instinct except the sum total of all your experiencesin your life. If you make a bum investment, hopefully you learn and yourinstinct gets better the next time around.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you get better over time? Bancroft: Well, I hope so; we had a pretty good record.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you flooded with business plans, some of which you probably didn’t getpast the first page? Bancroft: Yes, that all depended. Back in the days when I was really doing this in thesixties and seventies when I was at Bessemer, we would probably look atthree hundred proposals a year, and we might invest in three or four.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Really. Bancroft: Yes, we had a pretty good choice, and I think that’s important because I’veknown some individuals who— Somebody comes along and sells them on aconcept, and if it’s the only one they’ve seen, they’re likely to think it’s greatand go into it, and they have nothing to compare it with. It’s always veryimportant to be able to check out this proposal against some other. You don’tever really make an investment unless you’re convinced going in that the guyhas a great chance of making it, or that his company or team does. But on theother hand, it was certainly my experience in the early days, and probably stillis, that out of every ten investments you make, there are going to be two orthree that go belly up. And there are going to be a number in the middle, kindof the living dead; you might make a little; you might lose a little eventually. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is that pretty true across the board? Bancroft: I think so. Some people, I think Reid Dennis probably had, at least he believeshe had, a better record of winners versus failures. But I think it’s generallytrue that out of every ten investments you make, there’ll be two or three thatwill do really well, and of those, one or maybe two will make many times onyour money—enough to make up for the losses you incur on the other ones.But you think they’re all going to win when you go in, or else you wouldn’tgo in.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is there any common denominator, in your experience, of what goes wrong? Isthere one piece that is more likely to go wrong than another? Bancroft: Oh I think by and large it will be the failure of the founder or chief executiveto be able to deliver what he had thought he was going to be able to deliver.Another hurdle comes several years downstream. I have always likenedfounding a company a little bit to a string quartet where your founder mightbe the lead violinist, and he can operate and make very wonderful music, butonly with three other people. As the music grows, or as a company grows, andyou need, in the case of a company, additional financial help, manufacturinghelp, personnel help, other things, you’ve got to spread out and hire morepeople. At that stage of the game, the leader of the company has got tobecome more like a symphony conductor or an orchestra conductor than likethe leader of a string quartet. And unfortunately a number of them don’t makeit. That is usually the next most critical thing that comes along in the earlystages of building a company. One would hope, and I always hoped, as did all of my compatriots, that if thefounder was not going to be able to make it as a conductor, you couldconvince him to go back to the laboratory and invent the next generation ofproduct, stay with the company, stay on as chairman, but bring somebody inwith a business background to run it. And sometimes we’d be successful anda lot of the time we wouldn’t. That was always very sad because the foundersby this time would get mad and think that they knew how to take the companyto the next level, whether their board believed it or not. As often as not, they’dleave in a huff and sell their stock prematurely, which always was a shame.And I think there’s not a one of us that didn’t feel that one of the very few badaspects of our job was when we had to get rid of a guy we’d backed. Becauseyou get to like them all; you get very close to these people.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And it was their idea in most cases too. It was literally their baby. Bancroft: Absolutely. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you have any clue what percentage of companies that you invested in overtime in which a founder had to be forced out or moved to a different positionin the company? Bancroft: I think in a great many of them either that happens, or if you can’t quite workthat, you merge the company into a larger company so that they get absorbed.The main thing, eventually, from the viewpoint of my board of directors atBessemer was: how was the portfolio performing? During the time that I wasthere—and it’s been going on since for the most part—we would tend toaverage in the venture capital portfolio; longer term, a rate of return of about30 percent compounded per year. That was a lot better than the rest ofBessemer did. But remember, only 10 percent of Bessemer was in venturecapital; the rest of it was in marketable securities and real estate with a lowerrate of return but more safety. We were the high-risk portfolio, and we wereexpected to take large risks and hopefully have large returns. Themeasurement is not on any one or two companies; it’s really on how theportfolio does over time.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Pete, were you alone pretty much making the decisions about whichcompanies you would consider? Bancroft: Well, in my first year or two there was just me. And then after that I wasfortunate enough to hire two people, Bill Burgin and Neill Brownstein, tocome in, who were each thirteen years younger than I. But we began buildingup a team that way.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And they’d had financial background? Bancroft: They had had, in each case, a financial background. It really was a wonderfulexperience because I convinced my boss, who was at that point president ofBessemer, that I really needed some help. And so I interviewed a number ofpeople, including both Neill and Bill; they had totally different backgrounds.Neill was working for Ned [Edgar Francis] Heizer, [Jr.] out in Chicago, andBill was with one of the banks, a bank analyst in Boston. I couldn’t make upmy mind which one I wanted so I went to Jack Kingsley, who was my boss,and said, “Hey boss, could you interview both these guys and help medecide?” So he did, and about a week later I got together with him, and I said,“Well, what’d you think?” He said, “I think you ought to hire them both!”[laughter] I did, and they worked together in the same office for a while andthen in different offices. Eventually Bill stayed East, and Neill came out toCalifornia. But really that was the early make-up of our venture activities.And there was another fellow named Bob [Robert H.] Buescher, who had been with Fairchild Camera and who was a big help in terms of helping usstay organized. He was sort of our administrative partner, if you will.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were these four people, you included, coming at things from a slightlydifferent perspective? How uniform was your approach? Bancroft: Yes, we’d interview the people, talk to them. Eventually, in the early stageswhen I was still running just the venture capital, I would make a decision thatI wanted to do it, do the write-up, and take it to my boss who was president ofBessemer. If he approved, I would take it to the monthly board meetings ofBessemer as a whole. I always thought it was funny because we were talkingabout very small investments by their standards, of several hundred thousanddollars per investment, and they were used to dealing with a lot of money inthe marketable securities. But of course everybody got intrigued with thishigh-tech stuff that we were doing. Often in our monthly board meetings Iwould find myself spending more time than was really deserved for theamount of money I was looking for. But everybody kind of was interested inthis high-risk end of the business.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you raising a fund? Bancroft: No, I did not do a fund in the historical sense. Bessemer had a big pool ofmoney. At the time I joined them and became president, they had about $400million and—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That was set aside for risk investment? Bancroft: No, about 10 percent of that was set aside.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I was going to say, that’s a lot of money. Bancroft: No. They had a pool of revolving funds. They were cashing out of things andgoing into things all the time. And so I would just draw on that pool. If theboard approved the investment, then I’d just draw on the pool for funding.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you doing pretty well from the very get-go? Bancroft: Yes, I had pretty good luck from the beginning.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Bessemer could have done without a venture capital branch, could it not?  Bancroft: It certainly could.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Had they been doing any of that before you appeared on the scene? Bancroft: They had had one person in there doing it in a modest sort of way before I gotthere. There was a fellow named Peter Brooke who ended up going up toBoston and joining Tucker, Anthony. Charlie [Charles L.] Lea, [Jr.], whoended up being a very close friend, was at Bessemer when I first ran intoBessemer. I was trying to sell Bessemer on investing in a company that I wasin out here in Draper, Gaither & Anderson. Charlie Lea didn’t like thecompany; he thought it was a turkey, but we became very close friends andhave always stayed that way.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was Kingsley the one to convince that venture capital should be an ongoingaspect of Bessemer? Bancroft: Well, yes, broadly, but really on a deal-by-deal basis that we ought to begoing into this one or not going in. He was very good. I only recall beingturned down once for an investment that I went to the board with, and that wasmore for political reasons than for any other reasons. So I really had a veryeasy time with it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I understand that in the classic partnership form of venture capital all it takesis one general partner to nix a deal and it doesn’t happen. Is that indeed true? Bancroft: I think that usually is true. You see, after I left, Neill and Bill did the primaryventuring investments. And then after I retired in 1992, they eventuallyformed a partnership, and Bessemer Venture Partners has grown and is runnow very much like everybody else. They have an office down here in PaloAlto, and I think they still have one in the East. I’m not really very close tothem anymore. But it’s run more like a traditional partnership now.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It sounds to me before that happened, while you were still active there, thatyou had a lot of power in your hands. Bancroft: Well, in that particular area our board was either going to believe in the thingsthat I wanted to invest in or not, and if they hadn’t, presumably, they wouldhave gotten rid of me. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that always in the back of your mind? I mean, that could be a greatanxiety-maker. Bancroft: Well, I was always, number one, optimistic, and number two, I was puttingwhat little money I had in side by side with them. So if I didn’t think it wouldwork, I wouldn’t have volunteered to put my own money up, and if I hadn’tdone that, I wouldn’t have asked them to go in.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: This is a terribly general question, but what can you say about the personalcharacteristics that go into the average, if there is such a thing, venturecapitalist? Optimism—you’ve certainly mentioned that several times. Bancroft: You’ve got to be optimistic, and you’ve got to enjoy what you’re doing sowhen you wake up in the morning and look in the mirror, you’re smiling andlooking forward to the day, which is part of being optimistic. I think having areal interest in listening to what people have to say—you’ve got to be a goodlistener. I find if the venture capitalist does all the talking, he doesn’t learnvery much about the people he’s thinking about investing in. Very importantto listen and very important to compare the person you’re talking to with theother people you see and judge who looks and feels like they have themakings of making a real company. Eventually it becomes instinct if you do itoften enough.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, instinct, intuition. Bancroft: I lump the two together, synonymously<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You spoke of waking up at four o’clock in the morning and deciding, this dealseems to me to work. Bancroft: Yes, what you’re doing is distilling the sum total of what you’ve learned aboutthe company and the people. You’ve gotten to the point where you don’t thinkthere is a whole lot more you can learn, and you might as well make up yourmind: are you going to make the investment or aren’t you?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: The term ‘due diligence’ that some people bandy around, are therepartnerships that put heavy emphasis on that? Bancroft: Oh I think everybody does, however you want to call it. Everything I’ve saidto you about what I tried to do in looking at a company is, in fact, either doing due diligence or vetting it, to use the term of art. But that really is what youdo. You get to know as much as you can about what they want to do andeventually decide whether you want to make a bet on them or don’t want tomake a bet on them.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you think everybody uses personal assessment to the degree that youhave? Bancroft: Well, from what I’m told by my friends, yes. [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Don Valentine talks about market, market, market. I know that there are otherthings that go into it. Bancroft: Absolutely.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It’s obvious that from person to person there’s going to be a slightly differentweighting of what he or she pays attention to. Bancroft: Of course. I don’t know Don at all well, but from what I have gathered, hismain focus was on the market, and his main focus has been if the companycan’t make it, less hesitancy to change managements more quickly than someof us. For others of us, the market is very important because if you can’tperceive it as being big enough to build a decent size or large company thenyou shouldn’t go in. Reid Dennis was very people oriented; Don Valentine ismore market oriented. So we each come from where we come from.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: The other thing Don Valentine emphasized, and I don’t want to make him thecomparison all the time, but he was so strong about it, is the importance ofoperating experience, which of course he had had, and I don’t believe youhad. Am I right in that? Bancroft: No, I did not have any myself.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you feel that ever held you back? Bancroft: I often felt that had I worked in a manufacturing or another kind of company,it would have been good. I also felt that had I gotten a master’s degree inbusiness administration it would have been good. But I didn’t, and it workedout okay. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I would say so. Bancroft: In the case of Measurex—it was one of my very early investments after I gotto Bessemer; as a matter of fact, it was my first one—what I really liked wasthat Dave [David A.] Bossen had been the general manager of at that pointtheir only competitor, a company called Industrial Nucleonics back in Ohio.He had left it and had come out to California looking for a company that hecould run. So he had the experience of having operated a company. He raninto Bill Draper out here, and Bill was the first one to get to know him, andthen Bill introduced him to me.Dave outlined for me on the back of a napkin how he was going to build hiscompany. We talked about the people, and he had a wonderful sales manager,Chuck Worthley, who had been with him at Industrial Nucleonics comingalong. He had a guy named Gene Anderson who was technically very bright,who had been with a company out here. And he had a fellow named Erik [B.]Dahlin who had been with IBM; he was a Swede and a brilliant technologistwho understood clearly and had worked in the technology that Dave wanted touse. So I felt he had, really, the makings of a very good team. But in order toform the company, he needed $1.3 million. The group out here, the people hehad been interviewing at that stage of the game in late 1967 and the beginningof 1968, they were used to making $25,000 and $50,000 investments andpooling them together, and they didn’t have the kind of money to reach intodoing something that large. So Dave came back to see me, and I thought itmade a great deal of sense. We agreed to put in $400,000, which was the keyinvestment to get the rest to come together.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, and that was a lot for that era, wasn’t it? Bancroft: That was a lot, a lot for that era. But Bessemer had slightly bigger pocketsthan the individuals in the group in California. It turned out to be a wonderfulinvestment because Dave was one of the people who was able to ride throughthe transition and build Measurex to being really a very substantial, goodcompany, and didn’t merge it out until he was ready to retire. He was one ofthe very few who could go from the beginning all the way through. Arthur[Rock] talked about that rarity. Intel was another one. You had Bob [RobertN.] Noyce and Gordon [E.] Moore and the rest of them in there. They had awonderful team of people. The CEO would change as time went along tobring in people who had more expertise in one area of the business thananother, and Intel has become a magnificent company.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Quite a collection of talent there at the beginning.  Bancroft: Yes, but when you’re in the beginning, you don’t know what’s going tohappen.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You didn’t know the company would succeed, but you could tell somethingfrom Noyce and Moore’s track record. Bancroft: They had done it at Fairchild Semiconductor before.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Exactly. Bancroft: Well, as Arthur said in his interview—it’s the only investment he’s ever madewhere he was 100 percent sure from day one that it was going to be winner.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And wasn’t it just a handshake sort of thing? Bancroft: Oh yes, sure! I was trying to get in on that action, but no way. Arthur knewthem all very, very well, and he had that one all sewn up. So I got a little pieceof it, but not very much. [telephone interruption] Bancroft: One other thing I should say that’s interesting: venture capitalists early on andprobably still today have a different opinion about another thing. There aresome who believe that if you invest in a very bright group of people, and iftheir first set of products doesn’t work, they’re smart enough and good enoughthat they can change up and develop a whole new line of products and besuccessful as a company. Whereas there are others who look more to theproduct and the market, and I think Don [Valentine] would be in thatcategory.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Would you be willing to go the first way? Bancroft: Yes, depending on the people and the reason. I mean that’s another thingabout California, which we can get to when we talk about the differencebetween California and elsewhere. People are willing to dare greatly out here.To make a mistake is a learning experience, not a death knell, which it is inmany countries and many other parts of our own country. So making amistake can be a learning experience, depending on whether the people arelearning or not. 50<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You mentioned that you had to go elsewhere to get an assessment of anyparticular technology. Did that mean that over time you had quite an array ofexperts that you could call upon? Bancroft: Yes. I would take them on as a consultant for a few days to analyze what thesepeople were doing and then to give an opinion.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So your lack of specific technological background in A, B, C didn’t become aliability? Bancroft: Well, I think if I’d had an engineering background like Reid [Dennis] had, itwould have been better. But I didn’t, and so I sought to make up for it bygoing out and finding people who could evaluate whether this technology wasgood or not.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I assume you mainly invested in high-tech companies, right? Bancroft: That’s really what we’re talking about out here. We did some other things thatweren’t high tech, but most of them out here were that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So these were techie types that made pitches to you and I guess your board? Bancroft: No, not the board.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Just you? Bancroft: Yes, it never got to the board except for my write-up after I’d decided to do it,and I would go in to them for an approval or a disapproval.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So that’s different, isn’t it, than the way it goes with most venture capitalpartnerships? Bancroft: Yes, because we didn’t have a partnership. To the extent that Neill and Billand I would thrash things out, we’d talk to each other and help each otherdecide.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I imagine that even a business plan got pretty technical, did it not?  Bancroft: It could, and if I couldn’t understand it, I would try to get them to explain it tome in English. [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, they had to be able to translate. Bancroft: Yes. To be successful in business, you have to be able to communicate, whichmeans reading and writing and talking in the English language coherently andbeing able to convince people. You know, you’ve got to be a salesman ofwhatever you’re doing in order to sell it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I understand that that’s become kind of an art, that there are seminars andtutorials on how one presents a business plan, that sort of thing. But I’mthinking that back in the sixties it must have been much more ad-lib. Bancroft: We were going by the seat of our pants. I participated in a panel up at Yale atone point, and one of the questions from one of the students was: what coursesor course should I take at Yale to best prepare me to be a venture capitalist?And I said, “You want to take Daily Themes and English so that you can learnto read, write, and talk in the English language, because if you can’t sellyourself and communicate, you’ll never get anywhere.” And that’s far moreimportant than the technology—the technology comes later.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because you can get that other ways? Bancroft: You can pick it up from other people.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That probably surprised the person asking the question. Bancroft: It did. The dean of the college came up to me afterwards and said, “Thankyou, because we fancy ourselves as being a liberal arts university. All of thesekids want to get too technical too fast, and we really want them to get theirbasics before they do that.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I was going to ask you, and maybe you’ve already answered it by thevery fact that you were not a partnership. But is there any other way that youlook upon how you operated that was different than that of your colleagues? Bancroft: Not really in terms of the investment process and making the investments.Instead of the investments being in a partnership, they were in one corner ofBessemer’s asset pool. But our modus operandi was really quite the same as with the other partnerships. What did develop over time, and I rememberhelping early on with some of my confreres in New York, was getting themset up to have an appropriate carried interest, meaning to get a percentage ofthe profits you make for yourself and your group. Early on, well, as I told youbefore, in Bessemer they didn’t have that, and I had to convince them to letme invest.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, right. Bancroft: That’s how I did it. But over time, it eventually developed into a partnershipform whereby the money that would go in to be invested would provide to thegeneral partners of the partnership a percentage interest in the realized profits,which is the way all these partnerships really grew. Draper, Gaither &Anderson, as I think I said last time, was one of the early ones out here. Thatformat was designed by a lawyer named Ed Huddleson at Cooley Godward inthe early days, and that whole concept of the way partnerships work stillpretty much continues. It’s gotten embellished over time.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I read that the few firms that have a 30 percent carry sometimes cause dissentamongst their limited partners. Did you ever run up against that? Bancroft: Well, I used to hear about it periodically. It used to be that you would have anannual fee of 1, 1.5, or maybe 2 percent of the money invested just to payyour bills. And you would get 15 to 20 percent of the profits. Then over aperiod of time it changed, and they began to get from 2 to 2.5 and sometimesup to 3 percent of the assets as an annual fee, and 20 to 25, up to 30 percent ofthe realized profits. Most of them that did that, that I know anything about,didn’t stay that way for very long, particularly after the market started tanking,which we’ll talk about when we get to the NVCA. But I think the standard isstill pretty much 2 and 20: two percent of the money going to pay foroverhead annually, plus 20 percent of the profits if there are any.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Which when you have huge fund is quite substantial. [chuckling] Bancroft: Well, that was how things unfortunately changed, because in the early dayswe were investing pretty much our own money and money of the people forwhom we were directly working, like the Phippses and the Rockefellers andJock Whitney’s company—and Arthur [Rock] out here, and Draper, Gaither& Anderson. But eventually, as the industry grew, a lot of insurancecompanies and funds were investing rather larger amounts, and the venturecapitalists at that point were suddenly finding that they were managing moreand more and more money, and those 2 and 2.5 percent fees became pretty bigmoney. Eventually they got to the point, I think, of going too far. The pendulum always goes too far. They were all trying to raise more money sothey’d have bigger funds to manage, which of course means that you can’t beas selective in what you’re putting the money into. Therefore the quality of thedeals was going down, and the corollary of that was that they’d begincompeting with each other.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Are you thinking of the 1990s bubble? Bancroft: No, I’m thinking—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Even before that? Bancroft: Yes, I’m thinking of starting really to build up in 1980, and then increasing allthe way up. I felt as we got closer into the nineties and the 2000s that whatwas happening, what I consider merchant banking, was infringing itself uponventure capital. More and more people were taking commissions for things,getting fees for things, for managing these huge amounts of money. Thereturns for the limited partners weren’t nearly what they were in thebeginning, which they can’t be if you’re not being as selective as you used tobe. So then the pendulum would go too far, and the money would dry up.We’ll get to that in a minute.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It’s almost self correcting, isn’t it? Bancroft: Yes, basically, sure, and should be.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You mentioned wanting a piece of Intel and Arthur took it all— Bancroft: Well, Arthur and his group.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, there wasn’t room for you. Bancroft: Not for Bessemer, but I was offered a very small piece early on.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did Bessemer usually syndicate, I think is the word? You weren’t the soleinvestor—or did that also happen? Bancroft: No, we were always for the most part, even from the earliest times, havingother people co-invest with us. It wasn’t a formal group, but just like Arthur had his group that was investing with him, we had people that we regularlyinvested with. If we took a major piece of the deal, we would bring otherpeople in for the rest of it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was it a select group? You had a tried-and-true collection of people orinstitutions that you could bring in? Bancroft: It tended to be that way because it would become self evolving. Whensomebody asked you into his deal, and you worked well with him, you’d turnaround and ask him back into your next deal.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Does it work that way now, Pete? Bancroft: I don’t really know. I think now people have so much money that many ofthem are trying to grab off the biggest piece of it, and I think it’s far morecutthroat and competitive. We never had that in the early days. We nevercollected any fees. In allocating our investments, one person would take thelead, and one time it might be Bessemer, and one time it might be somebodyelse. You develop a group that you like to co-invest with, so you call themfirst. And so it evolves over time. But we never had the competition thatdeveloped after that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It sounds a bit like a gentlemen’s club. Bancroft: Yes, it was.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: People that you knew and trusted, and you could be fairly sure that next timearound you’d be let in. Was that, in general, the way it was? Bancroft: Absolutely. At the time we formed the National Venture Capital Association,there were only thirty-seven organizations in the country that we felt werevalid venture capitalists. And we all knew each other pretty well. She didn’tdefine what she meant went into being a venture capital partnership. Karen Southwick, The Kingmakers: Venture Capital and the Money Behind the Net, JohnWiley & Sons, 2001.  Bancroft: Yes, well there are a lot more now than even that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: When you were lead investor, was there the assumption that it would be youthat would go on the board of the company that you were investing in? Bancroft: In the early days, I would go on the boards. After Bill and Neill came in,eventually I would get— You know, you can only handle so many boards at atime. I would get one or the other of them, whoever had taken the lead inmaking the investment for us, to go on the board, and I would not.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Can you give me some idea of what kind of advice you were giving? Iimagine that it was less about the technology/science and more about how youdevelop this company. Bancroft: Yes, a lot of it was really having ongoing intimate contact with the chiefexecutive, because the leader of the company often can’t talk to his ownpeople, and he’s got to have a sounding board. Well, we would try to be thatsounding board as an outside director. So a lot of it was listening. If theywanted to launch a new product or do something, did it seem to make sense?Or I’d at least ask all the questions I could think of to make him think aboutwhether it made sense. And then when it gets to the exit strategy or raisingadditional money, why presumably we could be of some significant help.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: If the entrepreneur is heavily invested, and I mean that emotionally as well asin terms of his or her career in the company, as I imagine the great majority ofthem were or it wasn’t going to work, am I correct in thinking that it could getvery emotional? Bancroft: Very.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How did you handle those occasions? Bancroft: You’d try your best to get him to look at the reasonable side of things, andeventually if it didn’t work, it sometimes got to the point where you’dconvince the other members of the board of that company that a replacementwas needed, that the job had outgrown the person.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So a lot of psychology, dealing with personalities.  Bancroft: It’s very important, and you know sometimes we ourselves in the field wouldgo nuts. You fall in love with your own company. I remember one loser I hadthat I kept chasing until I practically got an ulcer trying to keep it alive.Finally one of my partners at Draper, Gaither & Anderson, back in the earlydays, came to me and said, “You know, you have not only walked the extramile for these guys, but you’ve walked an extra four miles. Why don’t you letit go?”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you in love with the people or with the business? Bancroft: I was determined I wasn’t going to lose. [laughter] I thought they were goingto succeed.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: No losers on your roster. [laughter] Bancroft: But I lost it all there, and on several others.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: There’s a lot to this, isn’t there? It’s not a black-and-white decision to arrive atthe right time to say, “Okay. Enough. I’m going to cut this tie. It’s too bad, butthat’s the end of you.” Bancroft: There’s not a one of us in my position that isn’t likely to say that wheneverthey’ve made a decision to make a change, they’ve always waited six monthstoo long. You just don’t want to give up and make a change. You do have tobe careful that you don’t fall in love with your own companies.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How much time do you suppose you were spending on nurturing thesecompanies? A lot? Bancroft: Oh yes. When I was running the venture capital part, most of it was spent withthe companies that I was invested in. Early on, I spent time looking for newones, but later on I let Neill and Bill do most of the work in developing thenew investments.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You mean time above and beyond the formal board meetings? Bancroft: Well, now you’ve got two kinds of board meetings. The board meetings of thecompanies themselves— <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That’s what I mean. Bancroft: They would usually meet monthly, and they would usually be all-day affairs.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But you’d be on the phone in between, wouldn’t you? Bancroft: Oh yes, quite often.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So another reason why you couldn’t be on too many boards, right? There justweren’t hours in the day to handle them all. Bancroft: That’s right. And then starting in 1974 when they made me senior vicepresident of all investments at Bessemer, I had to begin easing back from thepurely venturing side. Then when I became president in 1976, I had to stepway back. From then on I was just really investing in the companies that wewere doing. But I was picking up most of my information from Neill and Billbecause by that time I was responsible for all of Bessemer’s investments. Iwould have been giving short shrift if I had spent all of my time on 10 percentof them.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Venture capital, it goes without saying, is risky business. Bancroft: It’s supposed to be.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Risk with the hope of high return. Did you have strategies for reducing risk?Was there anything formulaic about it? Bancroft: The main thing was, don’t make just one investment; spread your risks amonga number of companies because some of them are bound to fail. By spreadingyour risks, you have better odds of the portfolio as a whole doing well.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Are we talking about tens of different companies? Bancroft: Well, I used ten because it was a convenient number. For the most part, wewould have thirty to forty companies in the portfolio at any one time, indifferent stages of development. Some being ready to exit, and some startingin fresh. But in the early days we’d make three or four investments a year, andthen of course it stepped up as time went along. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I imagine that an IPO took a lot of your time, right? Bancroft: Yes, but anytime a company got into trouble or had a fire, as we liked to say,it demanded a lot of time. We always had the feeling that you could manageone fire at a time. You maybe could manage two; but if you had three of yourcompanies blowing up at once—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You must have had some say about the timing of an IPO, right? Bancroft: Oh well, yes. But I mean that depended largely on whether market conditionswere ripe for an IPO and whether the company had matured to the point wherean investment banker was prepared to take it public.Often either the company’s not ready yet or it shouldn’t go public. Maybe itought to be merged instead, because once you do an IPO, you’re out there,standing on your own feet and have some public shareholders that you areresponsible to. I think there’s a moral responsibility not to take a companypublic until you think it has matured enough that it can stand on its own feet.And of course there are other times when you can’t do an IPO because themarket simply won’t buy it. I’d love to get into that discussion when you letme talk about the National Venture Capital Association, because that’s whereI have some statistics.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, maybe that’s where we should go. But are you happy with what we’vesaid about your approach to doing venture capital? Bancroft: Sure, I think so.Well, the reason I think the NVCA’s important is because it shaped theindustry in the early years. In late 1973, we were very aware of the fact thatthe climate out there, taxwise and otherwise, was getting worse and worse. Afellow named Charlie Smith, who was then at the Rockefellers, and I gottogether and had lunch. We said we really had to get ourselves down toWashington and find a way to do some lobbying to get some tax relief. Atthat point the income tax rate was 49 percent, and it didn’t matter whether itwas on capital gains or on ordinary income. We also realized that if we triedto send a representative of the Rockefellers and the Phippses and JockWhitney down to Washington, we’d be laughed out of town on a rail becausewhy do these rich fat cats need help? So we decided we’d better try to getorganized and get all of the people who were significant players in the venturecommunity involved. We could write them out on the back of an envelopebecause we knew most of them, but there was nothing formal. So later in1973, we got together at O’Hare Airport in the Red Carpet Room, Charlie Lea, Ned Heizer, and myself. In one or two of those meetings, Lionel [I.]Pincus was involved and Peter Brooke and Dave Morgenthaler.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Are these people from all over the country? Bancroft: These are people, at that juncture, primarily from the East Coast and Chicago.Ned Heizer was from Chicago. Dave Morgenthaler was from Cleveland.Anyway, we wrote up a preamble to what the NVCA ought to be and then gotit formed. We hired a fellow down in Washington by the name of Stan[ley][M.] Ruble to be our first executive director. So we formed this organization;we got thirty-seven members to join, and we put together a board of abouttwenty. We then decided that we’d better get some research. The MITDevelopment Foundation had recently done a wonderful study on very youngtechnology companies such as Digital Equipment, Data General,Compugraphic, Marion Labs and National Semiconductor, comparing themwith innovative companies such as Polaroid, 3M, IBM, Xerox and TexasInstruments—and with older mature companies such as Bethlehem Steel, duPont, GE, General Foods International Paper, and Proctor & Gamble. We gotthat study and wrote it up in our own way as a “white paper” to circulate inWashington. We called it “Emerging Innovative Companies: An EndangeredSpecies.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now this was in the mid 1970s? Bancroft: [The following few paragraphs contain some additional statistics and factsadded in editing by Mr. Bancroft from the white paper referred to above].The paper came out in 1976; we had formed the NVCA in late 1973. But whatwas happening down in Washington was that several factors were conspiringagainst the growth of young businesses in the U.S. In 1969, for example, therewere 548 IPOs or Initial Public Offerings of companies who had net worthsprior to the offering of less than $5 million. These small companies raised$1.458 billion in 1969. That was the height of the former market before theincreased taxes and business climate change really began to drain theeconomy, resulting in a market downturn. By 1973 IPO’s were reduced frombillion raised four years earlier. And in 1975 there were only four companiesable to go public, and they could raise a total of only $16 million. So therewas really no market out there for young companies. You were talking a fewminutes ago about an IPO and when do you do it. Well, if there isn’t anymarket, there’s no way to exit. The same thing has happened in differentcycles. And we are going through the same thing now, starting in 2008. 60 We found from the MIT study and included in our white paper some of thesesalient facts. Despite the fact that the market was drying up for youngcompanies, and that fewer and fewer people were investing in venturingcompanies, nevertheless, the companies themselves were doing somewonderful things. MIT compared 1969 with 1974, and during that five-yearperiod, the largest, most mature companies used in the study hired only25,000 people, whereas the innovative companies hired 107,000 people, andthe young technology companies hired 34,000 people. So we have aphenomenon of companies having more and more trouble raising money togrow, but these are the companies that are hiring people. And interestingly,more than that, in 1974 the largest companies in the study paid $1.5 billion intaxes, but the innovative companies paid $2.3 billion in taxes. So theinnovative companies were paying more than the largest companies, becausethe largest companies were hiding behind all their tax shelters, and theyweren’t really hiring people. The jobs being created and exports and salesgrowth were coming from the young technology companies and theinnovative companies. Over the five year period 1969-1974 the compound annual growth in sales ofthe mature companies was 11.4% compared with 13.2% for the innovativecompanies and 42.5% for the young technology companies. The compoundannual rate of increase in new jobs was .6% for the mature companies, 4.3%for the innovative companies and 40.7% for the young technology companies.Finally, the compound annual rate of increase in provisions for income taxeswas 7.8% for the mature companies, 8.5% for the innovative companies and34.1% for the young high tech companies. So we had this fascinating phenomenon that the young companies the venturecapitalists were investing in were really doing quite well, but they were allstarved for money because the market was drying up. And so we then startedgoing down to Washington and publicizing this paper.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How did you do that? Bancroft: Well, we had hired Stan Ruble as our executive director. He pointed us in theright direction of which congressmen to see and which of their assistants tosee.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So this was kind of a one-to-one thing. It wasn’t as though you were making apresentation to a subcommittee. Bancroft: Very much so. No, we’d go down and deal with them one at a time until wefound somebody that liked us. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Using this economic argument. Bancroft: Yes, and Ed [Edwin] Zschau, who along in there was a congressman fromSilicon Valley, was a big help. But the key guy was a fellow named Bill[William A.] Steiger who picked up on this, and he decided that somethinghad to be done about capital gains taxes. Eventually we got through thepercent to 28 percent, and then on down to 20. Eventually it got down to 15,where it is now, until Mr. Obama gets an increase next year. [tape change] Bancroft: Okay, just to continue with this thought—the Steiger Amendment got passed,and the law got changed in 1978. Remember, there were only thirty-sevenventure capital companies when the NVCA started, and in 1973 those thirtyseven firms had the availability of about $600 million total to invest. Rightafter the tax laws were changed in 1978, confidence in growth began to returnfirms to 95 venturing firms with $4.1 billion to invest. And in 1998, the 25thbillion under management, and in that year alone over $10 billion of actualinvestments were made by these firms. So there was this huge change-upduring the twenty-five-year period in which the NVCA had existed, and it allcame about because taxes went down so that investing in young companies forcapital gains was encouraged. It once again became worthwhile to investlonger term in companies that were creating jobs and growing, so that wewere basically able to change the economy around.I was looking at something the other day: in 1999 there were 3,649 separatecompanies that received $48 billion in investments. This was in the venturingarena. Two hundred and seventy-one companies backed by venture capitalistshad IPOs raising $23.6 billion in 1999, and the overall market value of thosecompanies that came out of the venture capital community on the date of theirIPO was $136 billion. So, this little tiny group was able to have a tremendous impact on theeconomy, and it really was all due to being able to bring the tax rates backinto line so that people would dare to take the risks. Because not everybodywas making a 30 percent return on their portfolio. As a matter of fact, asthings went along and you had more and more competition, the rates of returngot lower and lower and lower. But the venture capital community in its earlyyears really chipped in. Reid Dennis and Dave Morgenthaler spent a lot oftime back in Washington talking to congressmen and trying to get them tounderstand the economics of backing younger companies because they’re theones that are creating new jobs. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I remember Reid Dennis talking about Morgenthaler. Was he a venturecapitalist? Bancroft: Yes, Dave Morgenthaler was one of the founders of the NVCA with me. Hecame from Cleveland. He had Morgenthaler Associates, his family venturecapital company, and he had his kids in it. When we formed the NVCA, wemade Ned Heizer the first president and then chairman. Then Charlie Lea wasthe second president and then chairman. I was the third. Dave Morgenthalerfollowed me, and it kind of went on and on, and the organization grew fromthere.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Would it be correct to characterize NVCA, at least in part, as a lobbyingorganization? Bancroft: Yes. Basically a lot of the work they did was to go out and try to convincecongressmen that they shouldn’t be too hard on capital gains taxes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: To this day? Bancroft: Absolutely.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: In that late 1970s period, you were also tapping into a concern, particularly atthe Washington level, about the state of the American economy and the placeof American competition on the international scene. Everything was goingdownhill. Bancroft: Sure. Well, we had President Carter from ‘76 to ’80, who tried tomicromanage the country. He has been, in many of our opinions, a far betterformer president than he was an active president when he was there. [laughter]Reagan came in, and Reagan was very pro-business, and so there was thishuge turnaround. Industry, of course, took off and technology took off. Andwe see until recently a climate that is so totally different from what Iremember in the ‘70’s, because we were always struggling to find the moneyto put into the companies.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: The ERISA Act [Employee Retirement Income Security Act] loosened theinvestment criteria for pension funds, so you not only had the lowering of thecapital gains tax but also a loosening up of sources of funding.  Bancroft: Right. It was very good in that sense. The other thing that unfortunately cameout of it was the taxing of stock options, which was harmful to the people andthe companies.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And did that happen about that same time? Bancroft: I’ve forgotten just when it came in, but it was through that period of ERISA.To me the good part about ERISA was allowing institutions to not worryabout the Prudent Man Rule in investing a portion of their assets in high-riskinvestments. The stock option thing was really a shame, because what you’redoing there, if you get options to shares at $1, and you exercise the optionswhen the stock is at $10, under the newer rules you would have to payordinary income taxes at the time you exercise the option even though youdidn’t have any cash. Because all you’re doing is exercising the option andgetting the shares, but you have to sell a lot of what you get in order to pay thetax. Then what you have left grows at a capital gains rate. But the practice outhere, particularly here in Silicon Valley—less so in the East—was to try andempower almost all your employees by giving them stock options, so thateverybody felt a piece of ownership in the companies. I think that was a vitalpart of why Silicon Valley grew and is still growing.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Congress was just trying to— Bancroft: Get more money. But it’s kind of dumb to try and take money away when youdon’t have any cash. So you force somebody to sell what hopefully is a goldengoose that they’re working on to help their companies grow.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you part of any battle there? Bancroft: I was not by that time. I basically set up the [NVCA] retirement program rightabout 1980 or thereabouts. We had gotten pretty well entrenched with ourfounding directors, and a lot of them were beginning to look upon being adirector of the [National] Venture Capital Association as being a sinecure forlife. And of course the industry was growing very fast, starting in 1980, and itbecame very important to get new, young blood in. So I led a movement toestablish a three-year limit on being a director, and then set up three classes sothat we had the class that was retiring in one year, and then the second year,and then the third year. And when you retired, you had to get out of theorganization, or at least off the board. And since I was one of the founders, Idecided to set myself up to go off the board in the first year, so that I couldturn to my fellows who were less interested in retiring and say, “Come on guy.I’m doing it; you can do it, too.” So we set up a class system, and that has held true since, and it’s been much to the benefit of the NVCA because theynow have broad membership. But I moved out of the NVCA at that point.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Can any venture capitalist or organization belong to the NVCA? What are themembership qualifications? Bancroft: I don’t know what they are today, but I would think anybody with areasonable pool of money and saying he’s a professional venture capitalist,they’d probably welcome in.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Are there annual meetings? Bancroft: Again, I don’t know what’s happening today. I do know they have at leastannual meetings, because I came to the one in 2008 where they invited all thepast presidents of the NVCA, and it was here in San Francisco. We haveanother one coming up this May where I’ve been asked again, and they’regoing to throw some award my way [The NVCA American Spirit Award]. Sothey do have that, but the work goes on all year round.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Are you happy with NVCA coverage? Do you care to say anymore? Bancroft: No, I think that pretty well covers the early days of it, which I wanted to besure got covered because of all the people that you have interviewed so far, allof whom are from here [northern California]. Reid [Dennis] was the only whowas active back in Washington during the period I’ve been talking about.Now, in recent years, Dixon Doll was the head of the NVCA two years ago,and somebody from the East is in now, but he’s going to be succeeded by ayoung lady out here, Kate Mitchell, whom I met the other night. So it is nowfully national in scope. But in the East we had most of the people that werewilling to go to Washington and take the time in the ‘70’s because New Yorkis a lot closer to Washington than San Francisco is. So in the early days mostof the water was being carried by folks from the East.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, shall we move to regional advantages? Bancroft: Sure, sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What is your view of the Bay Area in specific, and Silicon Valley even morespecifically, in the development of venture capital? Why here?  Bancroft: Several reasons. First of all, you had two seats of learning at Stanford and Calthat had a lot of technology available. Secondly, you had a fellow named Fred[Frederick E.] Terman at Stanford who was the father of trying to gettechnology companies going out here. I think he was the one that inducedHewlett and Packard to start Hewlett-Packard in the garage. Also, throughStanford they began leasing out a lot of the land to companies to start doingthat. The climate, of course, is very important because so many people inWorld War II and in the Korean War coming from other parts of the countrywould go through here and see what the climate was like, and when they cameback they didn’t want to go home to their snowy winters. I don’t know what it is now, but it used to be in the early days there weremore people living in California who were not born here than who were bornhere. They all came from someplace else, and they all had the gumption to getup and leave their settled communities in the East where they had family andfriends and knew everybody and could have stayed comfortably for life, andcome out here to dare greatly. To me California has always been a place todare greatly, starting with the Gold Rush. I of course knew about it from myearly history at the Bancroft library, and the fact that my great-grandfather[Hubert Howe Bancroft] came out during the Gold Rush. I’ve always felt thatCalifornia was the go-to place to get things done. As I said a little bit earlier, you weren’t scared to make a mistake here; you’ddust yourself off and start again. All these people would communicate quitefreely with one another in these different companies and trade ideas, and itwas just a great place to be. Of course, we had a wonderful school systemwhen I grew up. It’s gone to hell in a hand basket now, for the most part. Ourtaxes are now very high, and the state is on the verge of going bankrupt. But itwas a classic case for good educational availabilities, lots of companiesstarting up, lots of jobs, go out and dare greatly in the Promised Land, and Ithink far more so than Route 128 around Boston. There’s a little bit of it downat the University of Texas in Austin because [George] Kozmetsky, who wasone of the founders of one of the early companies—Scientific Data Systemsthat Arthur Rock backed—moved on down. He’s dean of the University ofTexas in the technological area and has done a lot in the Austin area. What’s happened in recent years is that because of the taxation and the highcost of living out here a lot of companies are offshooting some of theirmanufacturing and other things, both to the Far East and back to Texas orNew Mexico or Arizona or elsewhere. But California’s still a magnet fordrawing people, and I don’t know how much longer it’ll go on. It all dependsupon whether the business climate gets changed or not. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I think it was Bill Draper who talked about how large a presence people fromelsewhere are in Silicon Valley. He was particularly, I believe, thinking of theIndian presence. Bancroft: Absolutely. Well my daughter went to Stanford undergraduate, and then shewent to San Francisco State for her master’s, and then to Cal for her PhD.When she got her master’s from San Francisco State, I went to thatpercent women and about 75 percent Asian! [chuckling] It was very, veryclear who was getting educated and taking advantage of it. And of course nowthere’s so much going on in India that a whole lot of people from India arecoming here and going back home. It’s all going to change, but I don’t knowhow.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you have any strong opinions about Sarbanes-Oxley? Bancroft: I think they went too far. I’m not an expert on it, because I’m really no longerin the loop. But it seems to me that, as with any well-intentioned legislation,you go too far and ruin the spirit of the good folks.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Meaning too much reporting and— Bancroft: Yes, too much reporting, too much paperwork for small companies who can’tafford the overhead.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you think Sarbanes-Oxley has contributed, maybe only in a small way, tothe recession that we seem to be now coming out of? Bancroft: Yes, I think anything that promotes government interference you have to lookat pretty carefully. Obviously, we need some regulation because there arealways bad guys that go too far in any direction. But you don’t want to throwthe baby out with the bathwater, and there’s too much regulation and toomuch proposed regulation that may be throwing all the babies out with thebathwater.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is Pete Bancroft veering towards the libertarians? Bancroft: Oh, I’m pretty libertarian. [laughter] <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You mentioned Route 128. You are a prime candidate for comparing East andWest, having been born and educated largely on the East Coast. Is there anymore you care to say? Bancroft: We had a number of investments at Bessemer along Route 128. Of the boardsI was on, at least a third were up that way. So, yes, we were quite active upthere, and it’s a fine community. I don’t think it has had the same verve andenthusiasm that you get out here in Silicon Valley. But they did a very nicejob because Harvard and MIT kicked in, much as Stanford and Cal did herefor technology backgrounds for entrepreneurs there.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: MIT these days is very entrepreneurial, is it not? Bancroft: Very. And you’ll find with Charlie Lea and some of the people that are havingbecause they’ve really focused on it. Bill Burgin, who worked for me, is backup in Boston now.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Does he talk about the difference? Bancroft: Well, I haven’t talked to him much about it recently.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: This area that we live close to is, as you say, not risk averse—you failed inthis company, well, pick yourself up and try another. Bancroft: Well, I think the key is leaving your settled community to dare greatly, and ittakes a certain kind of personality to do that. There’s a lot of it going on in theBoston area, but I think people are more conservative there than they are here,and, you know, who’s to say that’s bad.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you want to say anything about your philanthropy? Bancroft: Well, if you’d like. I’ve set up—about eleven years ago—a family foundationin which I had all seven of Monica’s and my kids, of whom only six are stillalive, involved as directors and involved in the foundation. I have always felt,to use that wonderful expression that you didn’t know when I mentioned itlast time, that you ought to be investing in things where you have some skin inthe game. So I have encouraged all my kids to give some of their time toorganizations to whom we are granting money, to give to local charities whoare small enough that our grant will make a significant impact on the organizations and to take some time to work with them. I think the workingwith them is quite important, both for my kids’ benefit and for the grantee.And that’s worked very well over ten years, eleven years now. I also feel that when my time comes, I want to be sure my family is well takencare of. But any excess beyond that point I am going to have added to thefoundation so it will continue to grow over time, and by then they will havehad many years of experience in operating it. We have foundation meetingstwice a year, and it’s a wonderful opportunity, because I start them all outinitially by having each person take five to ten minutes to bring everybody inthe family up to date on what they’re doing, thinking, aspirations, hopes,problems. It’s a great way to stay in touch because they are all over thecountry, and so it’s just wonderful when we get them together. That wayMonica and I can learn what’s going on! They seem to enjoy it, because theykeep coming back for more. One of my sons has become the president of the foundation, so he is more andmore taking charge of what it’s doing. But the nice thing I like, having hadeleven years where the founder is still around, is we’ve been through most allof the problems you can go through: marriages and bringing spouses onto theboard, divorces and getting rid of spouses, that kind of thing. The only thingthey haven’t had yet is the loss of the founder, and I hope that’s still a fewyears off.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, we all do. Bancroft: But I’m very pleased with it. Again, it’s operating in a microcosm; it’s stillquite small. Monica and I do a number of things for some of the local charitiesor the opera and the symphony and that kind of thing. I know that Reid Dennisand Pitch Johnson and others have been very active in running that. And Ithink that’s terrific. But what I really wanted to do was have the foundationstart as being down and dirty where people would be contributing their time aswell as the money we had to give.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And all six really do? Bancroft: Yes. Oh, it goes in different stages. They’ll get interested in a project locallyand work with it until it works its way through. Then if they get busy withfamily or work they still come to meetings but they drop away as sponsors.Which is fine. And we’ve got the grandchildren now involved increasingly.And you know, I don’t care whether each of the kids wishes to sponsorsomething or not—it’s available. I have found that they all have, at one pointor another, come in and picked up on a project and worked with it for a while.And then they move and times change. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, is there anything you would like to add in conclusion? Bancroft: [Added by Mr. Bancroft during the editing process.]I do want to say a little about the Bancroft Library at UC Berkeley. It is aspecial purpose library, much like the Beinecke at Yale. My great grandfatherfirst came to California as a bookseller with a consignment of books when hewas nineteen years old. He was quickly bitten, not by the gold bug, but by therealization that well over 100,000 people had poured into this sleepy state,which had contained only 7,000 non-Indians in 1847. In just a few years, all[immigrants] looked to get rich, and because of the gold were able to buyclothes, food, and all life’s requirements—in short, to immediately establish aflourishing market economy and fast growing cities in San Francisco andelsewhere.He became intrigued with this. He came to realize that he was witnessing thelast march of western civilization, growing from nothing to become a majorpart of the country in just a few short years. He began collecting everything hecould find written about first California, then the whole western part ofAmerica. Eventually, he and a group of helpers wrote 39 volumes of history,and he completed his major efforts by selling his library to the University ofCalifornia in 1905. The library has continued to flourish until this day. WWhen we moved out here for good at the beginning of this century, my wife,Monica, suggested that in our personal charitable interests we had given agreat deal to Yale over my lifetime and that it would be an excellent time forme to return to my roots and begin seriously contributing to the BancroftLibrary and to its future. Her timing was perfect, for the Library was just thenlaunching a campaign to finance the retrofitting and expansion of its facility.I took her advice and, with the enthusiastic support of Charles Faulhaber, thewonderful director of the Bancroft, participated in the renewal of the Libraryand have been delighted to have such close ties with it these past seven years. I think that covers everything I can think of to say at this time.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I certainly thank you. I should add in closing that the only reason I’mhaving the privilege of talking with you is because you were the one who hadthe idea and supplied the backing for this series on venture capital. I am verygrateful to you. Bancroft: And I in turn am very grateful to you for taking charge of running it. No, Ithink it’s been a good thing to have, and I think it will be a fine repositoryover time for research for people who want to learn about the early years ofthe venturing business, because it really started out here in the early 1960s. 70<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, and you were a big part of that. Bancroft: Anyway, it’s been fun working on it and fun doing.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I’m glad, and I thank you for all of it. 
Interviewer: Today is October 20, 2009 and this is the first interview with DonaldValentine. I’d like to start at the beginning, namely where you were born,what it was like to grow up in your family, and your early schooling. Valentine: Suppose I don’t like subjects like that, can we finesse them?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, sure. But not only are people interested in where you came from, but inmany cases it shows the evolution of how you got where you got, and whatyou may have picked up along the line that you later found useful, or not. So,go through it as much you can stand, please. Valentine: You’ll find that I like dealing in brevity and summary. As is true of a lot ofpeople, I was born and raised in the East where it snowed, and I vowed neverto live anywhere where it snowed on my driveway. So I came to California.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] And that’s the early life of Donald Valentine? Valentine: Well, I mean that’s a motivation that got me here.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, yes, but there was something in between. Valentine: Not especially exciting or relevant.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I don’t know that I agree. One thing that I learned is that virtually allyour schooling, with the exception of business school at UCLA, was inCatholic schools. Valentine: Correct.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, what did that instill? Valentine: Well, the one thing that I remember that it instilled—the Catholic nuns did notallow people to write left-handed. The Italian word for left is sinistra, whichalso obviously means sinister. And the Catholic nuns thought people whowrote left-handed were sinister, so you wrote right-handed. And they poundedyou with a yardstick until you changed, and I discovered that I didn’t changeeasily. [<|endoftext|>
Interviewer chuckles] So yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So there was a little contention? Valentine: I wouldn’t quibble over the adjective, but I think it was more than a little. Ihad demonstrated a technique of writing left-handed that I think qualified forthe Palmer writing system that they felt strongly about, which only got me afew more lashes of the yardstick.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And how do you write nowadays? With which hand? Valentine: As you have seen, I don’t write at all, I print.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All right, you print, but it’s very beautiful, as I told you off tape. Valentine: Thank you. It’s an accident of a violent learning experience. So, if you likethis Catholic orientation, I started with Franciscan nuns who were generalists,not especially well educated, very passionate about their faith, and very adeptat beating you.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Physically, you mean? Valentine: Did you ever get hit this way? [demonstrating]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: No. On the ears? Valentine: Wherever their hands happened to hit on your head. I graduated from the nunsto Marist brothers who were slightly better educated and were not given toviolence. That’s because the kids were bigger.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: This was high school? Valentine: Yes, Mount Saint Michael, and retaliation was always the threat. And then Iwas educated by the Jesuits at Fordham who are very highly educated bycomparison to my prior experience, and their idea of brutality was intellectual.As a generalization, they were well educated, they were smart, and they wouldbait you into positions that clearly demonstrated their superiority. They used aSocratic technique of teaching.Norton: Can I ask where you went to college? Valentine: Fordham University.Norton: I went to Holy Cross. Valentine: Ah! A similar kind of fraternity.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And I had a stint with the Catholics too, way back. So some of what you’resaying, not the physical beating aspect, but others I think we both canprobably identify with. Valentine: Yes, having never gone to any other kind of school, they are very relevanthistorically. And it’s an interesting history. Dan Brown, a current activeauthor, is making a lot of progress writing about things that involved, orinvolve, history and fantasizing about different elements and timing of theCatholic Church.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, let me ask you one more thing and then we’ll leave it. What did thisrather rocky introduction to Catholicism do for your faith? Valentine: [pause] Interesting question. Never thought about the question, don’t have apat answer. I suspect since it was the only religious orientation I was everexposed to, until I got to the Jesuit’s level of education I never thought aboutalternatives. So, dealing with the question more obliquely, my middle initial isT for Thomas. Thomas was the apostle who was the doubting person.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Doubting Thomas. Valentine: It probably did a great deal to encourage both my inquisitiveness andinclination not to believe what I was told or heard. Now, how is that relevant?In the business I’m in, it’s all about figuring out which questions are the rightquestions to ask, and since we don’t have a clue what the right answer is we’revery interested in the process by which the entrepreneur gets to the conclusionthat he offers. Our business is a business of highly intuitive decision makingand the fact that it’s done in a scientific area doesn’t make it scientifically,practical to make decisions that way. So—long-winded answer about faith.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: The way you describe yourself at a young age is you’re not sitting around justtaking what’s thrown at you. Does that have some relationship to the way youwere raised? What about your parents? Valentine: [pause, sigh] I’m struggling to make a connection. Neither were educated,neither graduated from grade school.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Really? Valentine: Both were dedicated readers, but rather random and not especially purposefultoward an objective. Reading for entertainment was much more a descriptivethan attempting to learn a body of knowledge about anything. I don’t thinkthere was a connection. My grandparents were equally uneducated, so thereisn’t a real nexus between the family pasts, regardless of generations, that Ican recognize or conclude.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I can think of two ways that it might. First of all, they may have wantedmore for you. So that leads to the question, did they want you to exceedacademically? Did they want you to go to good schools? Valentine: I have a brother, and if I were to judge, I would say that our parents wereinterested but allowed us to make the decisions, deferring I think because oflack of familiarity with choosing a high school, lack of familiarity of choosinga college. So I think they deferred to however the school influenced andformed our thinking about what to do next.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were they pleased when you achieved? Valentine: Yes. The family member I learned the most from was my Danish grandfatherwho explained to me that despite the fact that you cannot write left-handedyou should eat left-handed, and that you should eat everything. [<|endoftext|>
Interviewerchuckles.] And by trial and error you’ll find things that you like a lot andthings that you like less, and just eat the things you like a lot but tryeverything.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you extend that philosophy beyond food? Valentine: It’s the only areas in which he and I interacted. He was only partially anEnglish-speaking man and unfortunately lost his hearing in the SpanishAmerican War. I have no idea why he was in the Spanish-American War, buthe was. As far as I know there was no draft or anything in those days. And hewas clearly an immigrant from Copenhagen, so what he was doing in Cubawas a mystery to me.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now the other way I could imagine some connection, stepping back a bit, Iread that your father was a truck driver and a Teamster? Valentine: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That, speaking very stereotypically, produces an image in my mind ofsomebody who is no patsy. I imagine a strong individual? Valentine: Headstrong. Yes. The fundamental basis of conversation between us onanything that had any consequence was his dedicated position of being in aunion, the Teamsters, and eventually becoming a very, very minor functionaryin the Teamsters. His argument was: you know you clearly are opposed to theunions but they got you where you are. I don’t remember what I said but itwas probably something like, “It’s part of overcoming my past.You know I’m going to edit all of this out. This is never going to see the lightof day.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, then you’re going to get some opposition from yours truly. Valentine: It’ll have to do with the next two hours.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] Are you issuing an ultimatum? Valentine: If it came across like an ultimatum, it’s an ultimatum.Norton: You’re the first venture capitalist who’s threatened us. [chuckling].<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Chalk that one up! Valentine: I will be the first to do a lot of things that you haven’t encountered before.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, we’re a pretty vicious group. Valentine: Yes, right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I’m wondering if that rough-and-ready family background didn’t start you offin a certain direction, and I mean in terms of how you confronted the world. Valentine: Well, it’s interesting because I don’t remember ever thinking about thesethings. Once I protested to my father that I was getting tired of these regularbeatings, and he said, “Well, they wouldn’t beat you if you weren’t doingsomething wrong, so clean up your act!” I think he was very inclined towardauthority and its relevance, and I became just the opposite. I was—terribleattitude about the military. Didn’t like, don’t like regimentation. Don’t likeinterviewers telling me what we have to talk about even if I don’t want to talkabout it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] You seem to be doing a good job. Valentine: Time will tell.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, let’s go through more or less chronologically. Skipping over grammarschool, but by the time you got into high school, and then Fordham, did youknow what you were interested in? Valentine: No.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What were you studying? What did you like? Valentine: High school, an all-boys school, small, was a matter of the normal, generalreading and writing and arithmetic approach. There were opportunities to takecourses, and I would take courses more in technical areas simply because thenature of the teachers were better. And they were teaching things about whichI knew absolutely nothing. So there’s a sort of an indirect selection process,but of not very many options.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You liked the practicality of it? Or was it just this was better instruction? Valentine: I think it was because the instructors were better, and so better instructionwould be my choice in that multiple choice. I don’t know anything about HolyCross, but I suspect it’s the same in the general sense of it being a universitythat has different schools. Fordham has a school of pharmacy, a school of law,a school of education, both at the graduate level and the undergraduate level.But you spend two or two-and-a-half years taking the core prerequisitecourses, after which you got to choose something if you had something inmind that you wanted to choose, with a big dollop of religion, which becameprogressively more optional as you went from sophomore year to junior yearto senior year.So, probably most interesting to me in those days was chemistry. I now have a16-year-old grandson who is an exceptionally good student, and he asked whyI took chemistry. He thinks of chemistry as a difficult high school subject. Itold him that the periodic table had very few elements then compared tonow—a lot of things have been discovered in 50 years. More blanks than therewere elements, and you could tell from the electron valences what thechemistry of the unit would be when found. I said, “It was easy, I only had tolearn about a dozen elements. You have to worry now about 150.”He said, “You have to be kidding! You didn’t have these elements then?” AndI said, “No, they were invented between my time being fifteen and my timenot being fifteen.” So it’s different, and that’s as close as I would have gottento something exceptionally technical.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why Fordham; why did you go there? Valentine: One of two reasons was the primary reason. It was close and an easycommute, and it was inexpensive. My father’s position was you can go to anyschool you want. It’s your problem getting there and back; it’s my problempaying for it, and this is what I’m going to pay. Teamsters don’t make a lot ofmoney. It’s the top of the Teamsters that are rich because they have access tothe treasury.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] And your father didn’t. Valentine: My father didn’t have access to the treasury. I was one of the few people whowent to school, paid their tuition quarterly in cash. My father did not have achecking account, so there was no way to take a check.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, so where are we, about 1950? No, we’re a little later than that becauseyou graduated from Mount St. Michael’s Academy in 1950. So we’re sort of1954, 1955, right? Valentine: They were all the same.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, well, the fifties were— Valentine: Not much going on.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What happened there that might have set you in certain directions? Valentine: There was a mandatory draft, and I was drafted.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right. Valentine: And I found out my sense of disobedience was not totally civil, in eitherdefinition of the word. I was a terrible soldier. Fortunately, the period of timethat I was in the military was an Olympic year, and somebody decided to getall of the athletes together. And to develop teams, basketball, water poloteams, whatever kind of teams, to compete in the Olympic trials and toeventually go to Helsinki. So I saw this as my way out of the military. I was inthe army in electronics, trying to teach senior officers to use moderntechnology instead of the way they were inclined to fight wars. I fortunatelygot sent, after being in the army for about twelve or thirteen months, I got sentto the navy.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why was that? Valentine: Why? That’s where all of the water polo players in the world were beingtrained. So I was in the navy for nine months, stationed in California—where Ifinally found a place where it does not snow in February. So I knew where Iwas going to live, and I got out of the military as fast as possible.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now what about the water polo? Valentine: What about it?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you playing it? Valentine: They gathered probably thirty to forty people—it is amazing to me how themilitary doesn’t change. They put us all on a naval base, a naval base that wasa naval flight base. So our water polo team had its own air force. There were ahalf-a-dozen pilots among us and any number of planes available to us so thepilots could practice. And the first thing that happened after breakfast, we sentout two planes. One went north, one went south, and the whole purpose ofreconnoitering the ocean was to find out where the biggest waves were. Andas soon as the choice was made, they radioed back to get the station wagonsready. We were going to go to Huntington Beach where the outside break wasspectacular in the morning, and we would surf all morning.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] And you wanted to get out of this? Valentine: Huh?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You wanted to get out of the military when this is what you were doing? Valentine: Then we had training in the afternoon. So we were in the water surfing forfour or five hours, and then we played water polo for several hours.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Sounds tough. Valentine: And yes, I wanted out of the military. So at one point in time, it turns out noone was keeping records. You could get out in that draft era in twenty-onemonths. I applied to get out—and this is before the Olympic trials. One of thesenior people managing this program said, “Well, if you extend your stay inthe military we’re going to, in addition to the Olympic trials, go on a worldtour and play water polo all over Western Europe.” I told him, “Tell me whenthe tour ends to the day, and I’ll extend to that day, not a minute longer.” “No,you have to extend for a year.” So I moved into a fraternity house at USC[University of Southern California] when my time was over. That’s where thebig pools were in Los Angeles in those days. And that’s where the Olympictrials were conducted, the preliminary rounds, at SC, at the Coliseum. So mymilitary career ended without my having to fire a rifle or any other kind ofweapon, in a fraternity house at SC.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] That’s pretty good! Valentine: And the thing I learned was that SC had the best dental school on the WestCoast, and as a result my dentist from 1956 onward has been an SC dentist.And they were right; they have a good dental school. So that’s all I learned inthe military.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All right, well, that’s a different sort of military career than I am familiar with.Does UCLA business school come next? Valentine: It was an interesting experience. I was just interested in taking courses in salesand marketing. While working, I took those in the late afternoon. Thesecourses were conducted—what’s the course that they teach where cooking’sinvolved? Something or other economics or economy or—Norton: Home economics. Valentine: Home economics. Home economics and marketing were in adjacent rooms.So I took marketing and an early dinner or a late lunch every day at the homeeconomics class before going to taking my curriculum.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] You’re figuring things out pretty well, aren’t you? Valentine: Mmm, yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I couldn’t figure out the chronology here. You were at Sylvania Electric? Valentine: No, I had long since moved on. Sylvania Electric was back where it snows.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, okay. So that was right after Fordham, before you went into the military? Valentine: No, Fordham, the military, Saint Sylvania Electric [<|endoftext|>
Interviewer chuckles] that hadWest Coast facilities. So my entire objective was to get employed inelectronics in a company that had West Coast facilities, another schemingoriented career move.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I am picking up on that. You hadn’t any particular interest at that point inelectronics? Valentine: Very interested in electronics. Sylvania was not a great example of advancedcapability. They were an old-line company. Sylvania is half of the wordPennsylvania, and they had factories all over Pennsylvania and upstate NewYork.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But it did get you to California. Valentine: Yes! Never, never to look back.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] You don’t miss the snow? Valentine: No. See I’m a great believer going back to then that Frederick Jackson Turnerwas right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Westward young man. Valentine: It’s all about—the perimeter of civilization is where things happen.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But you didn’t have that concept as a young man, did you? Valentine: Soon as I read Frederick Jackson Turner I did.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So that was another reason for going west; it wasn’t just a matter of weather? Valentine: Yes, it was a confirmation that you could have great weather and be on theleading level, or leading edge of opportunity of any kind. You’d be in ourcountry, in the West. And if you look retrospectively then, Europe, which is tome the East, was dead and an economic disaster. This is postwar by ten years.So it’s a Marshall Plan, and it’s a mess. The near East, Boston and places likethat, had not a lot happening in electronics. But it was the only place in theU.S., other than the West Coast, where something was happening, because ofM.I.T. and Harvard and a few of the great universities that are there. But theywere flawed; they had snow, and I’m not interested in that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] We seem to be getting back to that. Valentine: It was a very easy decision for me. Follow Frederick Jackson Turner wherethe weather’s good and life will be fine.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And it was. Valentine: Which I proved.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you’re not enrolled full time, I gather, at UCLA. Valentine: No, no.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You’re taking courses as you can. Valentine: Right, I’m not interested in a degree.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now why is that? Valentine: I don’t believe in business school.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why? Valentine: We have people here at Sequoia who went to business school, but most of theprimary partners here have not gone to business school. Or said differently,and this is a true story, when asked where I went to business school, I said,“Fairchild Semiconductor.” And the people said, “We’ve never heard of it.” Iwas talking to people who thought that if you didn’t go to Harvard BusinessSchool you could never learn how to manage money. And my rejoinder was Iwas not interested in learning how to raise money; I was interested in buildinggreat companies, and I didn’t have to go Harvard Business School to buildgreat companies.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Where does that idea come in—building big companies. Are you collapsingtime here? Valentine: Great companies. Yes, I’m trying to get to something I’m interested in talkingabout, instead of all this stuff you’re interested in talking about, if you want tomake a sharp point of it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [laughing] All right, well, we’ll move along then if I’m boring you—or you’reboring yourself. Valentine: Boring myself.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, you did admit that you hadn’t thought of some of the things that I askedquestions about. Valentine: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: At least one of the classes, or maybe all the classes that you were taking atUCLA you said were in sales and marketing. Why that particular facet ofbusiness? Valentine: Well, once having established a Fredrick Jackson Turner thesis personally, itwas a question then of what do you do? Well, early on at Sylvania I learned Iwas not going to be a great scientist. And in a world where things change alot, it’s usually a world in which science has a major component in the changethat’s going on. So I knew I couldn’t do that and didn’t want to do that. Sowhat else is there to do in a great company? Where is the decision-makingprocess in a great company? And the answer is it’s in marketing. In a well-runcompany, the marketing department in conjunction to the science departmentdecides, based on what their capabilities are, what problems they can solve,and what sequence should they solve them in, and how much money can theyspend on developing that product, and how big is the market? Who’s going tobuy this stuff? And that all happens with marketing in a primacy position. AndI would guess, I don’t know who you talked to among your twelve othervictims, that very few of them were real marketing people.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That’s true. Valentine: I didn’t choose marketing because I was going to be in the venture business; Ichose marketing because I thought that was the best place for me to be, on theWest Coast, in new ideas and new companies.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And you really had thought this through in your twenties, or whatever youwere, thirties? Valentine: Yes, true.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Very deliberately. Valentine: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That’s kind of amazing. Valentine: I suspect there’s a hidden compliment there which I’ll thank you for and moveon. The point though is I don’t think recognition is a great art form, becausethat’s what we do here [at Sequoia]. We recognize by Socratic questioningopportunities that are better than others, and why. And it seemed to fit myinformation-processing ability and interest. So yes, I—very geographycentric. Unlike Pitch [Franklin “Pitch” Johnson]—did you ever talk to Pitch?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. Valentine: He worked in a steel mill somewhere in Ohio or somewhere. I mean, youcouldn’t get six marines strong enough to drag me into a steel mill in InlandSteel in Ohio. Pitch has a totally different agenda and thought-processingsystem. He was willing to do that; I was not willing to do that. I knew what Iwas willing to do and where I wanted to do it. And tenacity is an adjective thatdoes work for me.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I can sort of agree with that. [chuckling] I do want to hear about Fairchild. Valentine: Fairchild was my major education.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You implied that. Valentine: You can skip all three schools and the beatings with the nuns and thefascination with the Jesuits. Fairchild was an early company when I joined it. Iwas maybe employee number forty or fifty or something like that. It was inMountain View, California, and it was in a leadership technology area—unproven. For which, if you had the right imagination to go with the product,it could have been, and did become, a spectacular company. It is the mother ofall the spinouts in Silicon Valley.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Had you been following Fairchild, or semiconductors, or anything related toit? Valentine: Semiconductors.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why? Valentine: Because in my opinion, the whole world of electronics components prior tosemiconductors was vacuum tubes. And places like General Electric madethem, and Philco made them, and RCA made them, and Sylvania made them,and they were all dead companies—East Coast, hidebound on the past, notforward looking or thinking. They all went out of the television business, theyall went out of the vacuum tube business, they were never a factor in thesemiconductor business. So my bet was that the semiconductor business wasthe business of the future in electronics. All of that stuff initially was madewith an element called germanium, which in its fundamental properties was avery limited capability material.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that what [William] Shockley was using as well? Valentine: No. The people that got the Nobel Prize, of whom Bill Shockley was one,were in Bell Labs working on primarily germanium, but also other materials.But the first transistors were all germanium. And Fairchild Semiconductorwas the first company, as far as I could find, anywhere in the world that beganmaking the semiconductors with silicon.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now, for somebody naive in this field—me—why is silicon superior togermanium? Valentine: The fundamental, elemental characteristics. So one of the things that happensin general in chemistry is when you heat a material it changes its activity andits performance capabilities. Germanium had a limited temperature range ofperformance capabilities. When exceeded it was worthless; it would die.Silicon worked at much, much higher temperatures. If anything, the higher thetemperatures the better. So you had a real fundamental occurrence of thebeginning of recognition. Everything made in the semiconductor businessthese days is made with silicon. Ninety-nine percent of every dollar soldworldwide, by any country, is silicon.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And had Bell Labs been moving in that direction? Valentine: Yes, all the big laboratories. They’re places that experiment and developscience and technology; they don’t make things unfortunately, but that’s adifferent story. Fairchild Semiconductor of Mountain View, California was astart-up, and that’s why in my opinion it was the best education I had, andinfinitely better than any business school education.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, look at the people you were rubbing shoulders with. Do you want to saya little bit about that? I imagine there was some one-on-one education ifyou’ve got Bob Noyces [Robert N. Noyce] and Gordon Moores [Gordon E.Moore] and people of that ilk in what was then quite a small company right? Valentine: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How many people where there, how many employees when you joined,roughly? Valentine: Well, if I was employee number fifty, there were forty-nine.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] All right, yes. Valentine: I mean it was a very small company, and that’s in all disciplines.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I read somewhere you were not in the original— what did they call them,the— Valentine: The Traitorous Eight.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: The Traitorous Eight. Valentine: Bill Shockley called them that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, right, understandably. He must have been more than a little disturbed,because there went his brain power, right? Valentine: He got what he deserved.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Had you been following all that, too? You were very aware of what washappening at Shockley Semiconductor? Valentine: The decision to follow silicon was like the decision to follow FrederickJackson Turner. Once I began to understand the thesis, the thesis of silicon,having taken chemistry, it was very obvious when you looked at the propertiesof the alternatives.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Give me a picture of what you found when you arrived at Fairchild and whatyou then did. Valentine: Well, the eight people were of different disciplines. Nobody had anymanagement experience, nobody had any manufacturing experience. Thesewere incredibly bright, narrow-focused individuals. So one guy knew all therewas to know about silicon, but he didn’t know if tomorrow was Wednesday orThursday—wasn’t interested. So you had a talent pool that retrospectivelywas perfect, except they had to learn how to make them, and they had to learnhow to sell them. And I was one of the people sent to Los Angeles in sales.million, or $1.5 million. In 1960, I sold five times as much in Los Angelesmyself. So this was product that everybody had been waiting for; they justdidn’t know it. So we had fabulous science, we learned how to make the stuff,and it solved big problems. And the customers were often in the military andaerospace business. There was a fairly famous defensive missile, called theMinuteman, that was filled with all this stuff. And Fairchild was born.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I’m imagining, and it doesn’t take much imagination, that with a newbreakthrough product like that you had to do a lot of educating. Valentine: Well, yes. In a big company, the people who are the real buyers are technicalengineers who design them into the electronics equipment. And that’s easy,because the alternative was so poor by comparison. The difficulty at sellingthem is when you get to the manager in the company, and the managementdiscovers that some tiny company from Podunk has all these designs, andthey’re appropriately worried. And that’s where you encounter the difficultyof being bonafide. And whenever we encountered that, and it’s one of thegreat advantages of the small company, I called Bob Noyce and said, “Wehave some problems here. Everything’s fine in engineering, but now we’re atthe bureaucratic level and we need you to visit.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And he would? Valentine: He would, oh sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was it at this stage or a little bit later that you had your rather famous salesconferences? Valentine: The sales conferences?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Or was that when you were at National Semiconductor? Valentine: No, that was at Fairchild. I never considered them famous. We were doublingand tripling sales every year. There are two things in business that matter, andyou can learn this in two minutes—you don’t have to go to business school fortwo years: high gross margins and cash flow. All the other financial metricsyou can forget. The accountants can get the numbers into the boxeseventually, but if you have a product with high gross margins, and Fairchilddid, it generates huge cash flow. And that means you can grow the companyas fast as the market will allow. And that’s what we were doing. And webegan having sales meetings—not unprecedented—at one resort-like placeafter another. So we went to Hawaii. No big deal.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that a new idea? Valentine: [chuckling] It was for the people at Fairchild!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were other companies doing this sort of thing to sell their goods? Valentine: Oh yes, the big companies like RCA and GE had—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: They’d been doing all that. Valentine: There’s nothing very fancy about that. I mean it’s a matter of just taking asmall number of people to someplace like Hawaii. We’re now in the veryearly mid-sixties. We had employees in the company who thought Hawaii wasright next to Japan, and that they could go for the weekend before the meeting,stop in Tokyo for a couple of days, and then go to Hawaii. It was amusing toexplain to people that once you got to Hawaii you had another three thousandmiles to go. But none of those people grew up when Pearl Harbor was areality. So that’s Fairchild Semiconductor.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Are you going to keep track of some of these people as you move on in life? Valentine: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: There’s a name that I picked up from that interview you pointed out—Roger[G.] Kennedy. I wasn’t clear what— Valentine: Oh, Roger had nothing to do with the semiconductor days. Roger was thehead of the Ford Foundation.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Where does that come in? Valentine: When I first tried to raise money to be in the venture business.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So I’m jumping ahead. I couldn’t tell from that interview where it fitted in. Somaybe we should wait until we get there? Valentine: Sure. Roger was early seventies.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: There’s something going on I believe at this time. There’s this thing calledThe Group, right? Valentine: I don’t know.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, again, it’s from reading and also talking to Bill [William K.] Bowes,who spoke to me quite a bit about The Group, a loose group of friends whohad some money and were investing. Valentine: Oh, totally different era. I didn’t realize we had left the semiconductorbusiness and had moved on.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I thought this was happening in the sixties, right? Valentine: Not for me; I was gainfully employed in the semiconductor business for all ofthe sixties until the early seventies.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I read that you were beginning to privately invest when you were atFairchild. Valentine: That’s true.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But it’s not with this group? Valentine: No.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All right, well, I think that’s relevant to the story, do you not? Valentine: I don’t know. Who the hell is in the group? I’ve never heard of them.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: No, I mean the fact that you were beginning to privately invest. Valentine: Yes, yes. That’s sort of a sideline. If there was a group I was not among theinvited.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, okay. Well, you haven’t addressed my question about private investment. Valentine: If you stop interrupting me I’ll— It’s on the tip of my tongue.20<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] It’s lucky I have a sense of humor. I could be very intimidated,but strangely enough I’m not. Valentine: Good for you. That’ll eliminate one story anyway, about the guy I talked to,apparently very sternly, and he fainted.[interruption]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: We have five minutes before a tape change. Valentine: Ah! Fairchild is spawning companies left and right. Our major resource is ourengineering, and customer after customer comes along and wants us to dosomething slightly different than we’re doing. What’s wonderful about thesemiconductor companies is their production. They make a lot of units similarto the concept of Henry Ford. You can have any kind of unit you want as longas it’s black, and it’s made this way, and that’s the way the industryflourished. Certain big customers wanted their products slightly differently.We didn’t have the engineering resources to take care of all these people, so Ievolved a system of selection. Which companies are we going to make thesespecial units for? What are the ingredients of these companies? How big aretheir markets? How good is their management? And we would maybe make aspecial product for one out of fifteen.And I began to think that maybe that selection process could also be used todetermine which companies might make interesting investments. Fairchildwas not interested in investing in these kinds of companies, so I said, havingfailed to persuade the board that they should, that I would do it. And I beganmaking very, very small personal investments in these companies which wewere treating specially, and I did it alone. If there was another group of peopledoing it, as I mentioned earlier, I wasn’t invited, I didn’t participate, I didn’teven know who Bill Bowes was.[End Audio File 1] Valentine: One final comment on this concept of a group. One of the things that willbecome more and more evident to you is that my own personal inclination hasnever been to be part of a group. I have always tended to be, without trying,very individualistic—very selfish, in the Ayn Rand definition of selfish, andit’s comfortable for me.So having said that, we’ve established that Fairchild is the mother of all spinoffs, and at a particular time, early 1967, a number of us were organizing toleave Fairchild. Bob Noyce was still the manager. It was still a division ofFairchild’s Camera and Instrument [Corporation]. In my exit interview withBob, who for me was the smartest person that I’ve ever known— He had anincredible blind spot and none of us could persuade him with any argument.He was a dedicated smoker, and he smoked cigarettes that had no filters, andhe died of heart attack. And Gordon [Moore], Victor Grinich—we all arguedwith him unsuccessfully. He was unmovable on this subject.So anyhow, it was our time to leave. Bob said, “Okay we have to talk about it.I have these great ideas.” I agreed that he had great ideas continuously. Andhe said in addition—it’s early 1967—“It’s too late to start a semiconductorcompany.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why were you not happy just to stay with him at Fairchild? Valentine: Because the nature of the structure—Fairchild Camera and Instrument was acompany on Long Island, had multiple divisions. All the earnings forFairchild Camera and Instrument came from Fairchild Semiconductor, and themanagement took that cash flow and invested in all these other turkeys thatwere terrible! And they wouldn’t provide enough equity participation for thepeople at Fairchild Semiconductor.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. Valentine: Which is why all the spinouts continued. Now, the reason I tell you thisanecdote about Bob in 1967 is because in 1969, two-and-a-half years later, heand Gordon announced they were leaving and starting a semiconductorcompany. So I called. I said, “I want to come see you.” He said, “I’d love tohave you join here in a minute. What are we going to talk about?” I said,“Two and-a-half years ago you told me it was too late to start a semiconductorcompany. I want to get your thinking about why two-and-a-half years later it’sappropriate. What’s changed?” Because our business is all about change.“Share with me what is happening in the universe that would cause you to dothis.” This was Intel in formation.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, right. Valentine: So, National was sort of a repeat of Fairchild Semiconductor in one sense. AtFairchild, at age roughly twenty-nine, I was running a sales force worldwidedoing $150 million in revenue. And what you like about that time and thatindustry is you got opportunities when you were young and when you couldimpose whatever creative ideas you had on a business—that was exceptionallydynamic. National, which was, unlike Fairchild, not a startup, was a publiccompany, very small, probably technically bankrupt. And a number of us wentthere and effectively created a company where there had been a staggeringcompany that was really destined to go out of business. The experience I gotthere was complementary to the experience I had at Fairchild, which was astartup. By the time it got to be 1971 I had had enough. I had learned, Ithought, all I was going to learn about silicon, all I was going to learn aboutthe semiconductor business. Having invented an entirely different structure inmarketing at Fairchild, I invented yet another structure at National. Now, I’vecarelessly used the word invented as though it had some kind of importanttechnological component, which is untrue and unintentional. It was just amatter of how you organize to do business at that particular point in time inthe world. And we formulated one at Fairchild which was very successful, andwe formulated a second one at National which was very successful.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why isn’t that invention? Valentine: To me, invention is what the people at Bell Labs do. They change thefundamental relation between one kind of material and another. They changefrom having a computer that would fill this room to where this giant computerbecomes a laptop—that’s invention. Anyhow, it’s a quibble. No one’s goingto buy the book for that reason. So, what’s happening? National is a publiccompany, the president of National is a manufacturing guy, a very good one.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Who was that? Valentine: His name was Charlie [Charles E.] Sporck. But, he was not a gifted publicspeaker, and he didn’t like to do it, and public companies have certainobligations forced on them by Wall Street to explain what you’re doing. And Iwas put into that role as part of the management’s explanation of thesemiconductor business and National’s position in it. I was approached bypeople in an organization, in the audience, who ran a very large mutual fundin Los Angeles called the American Funds or Capital Research andManagement. And they knew about my private investing, and they asked meif I would be willing to manage a pool of money dedicated to starting newcompanies. They would help organize it and raise it. One of the things I didnot do and didn’t learn from my diligence was there was a law called thePrudent Man [Rule], which basically said that the pension funds, theendowments and foundations, which is where all the money in the country is,were not allowed to prudently invest in venture capital.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because it was too risky. Valentine: Too risky. In those days they invested in bonds primarily; equities wereconsidered pretty risky. So that’s when I met Roger Kennedy. Roger Kennedywas running the Ford Foundation, one of the most high-impact managers andthink-tanks in the overall investment world in those days. Roger was theperson leading the charge to persuade the different entities in the governmentthat it was prudent to invest in stock. It was prudent to invest in stock incompanies in Europe, which was then unheard of.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: He was trying to change the rule? Valentine: He changed the Prudent Man Rule.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: 1978. And what was his argument? Valentine: [pause] I’m not sure Roger knew what argument that he had plied them withfor years finally caused the stars to line up right in a highly politicized world.How does the government make decisions now? Well, if anything, it wasalmost as complicated then in these areas. You had all of these guys sitting onboards somewhere who were eighty years old saying, “Gee, we can’t invest inWestern Europe.” I mean how long has Siemens been in business? A hundredand twenty years, and it’s too risky. They wanted to invest in bonds. Theydidn’t want to invest in stock.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, the late seventies is a period when the people in Washington, the policymakers, are getting worried about the United States losing out, particularly intechnology. The Japanese are going to do it all. I’m just wondering if theymade that leap: if we loosen up the rules here we’ll get people investing innew companies and maybe we have a chance to regain our superiority. Valentine: I’d like to believe that was a prevailing argument. I have no idea whicharguments were prevailing, but these mossbacks didn’t want you investing inthe biggest bank in London, never mind worrying about Toshiba. I think theywere so myopic about risk and the loss of dividends and the cash flowassociated with it, they were hard pressed to expand in any direction, andRoger was hammering on them since 1970. And progressively, this was notwhere you threw a switch and the law changed—this was grinding it outslowly; you made a little progress here and you could do that, and you madesome progress here and you could do this. But it was hell on wheels trying toget some relaxation. So if I ever needed a patron saint, Roger’s my nominee,because in some mysterious way he moved a mountain.And all of a sudden University of California was willing to give us money,Yale University was willing to give us money, Alcoa was willing. So a wholebunch of people who had been sitting on the edge of their seats to make moreaggressive investments with a very small part of their funds finally got a smallgo ahead, and people like us were able to start in business. Now, I did itdifferently. Guys like Pitch, Bill [William C.] Edwards. I’m trying to thinkwho was Pitch’s partner. Bill Bowes might have had an SBIC. They went tothe government. It was Bill Bowes, Pitch Johnson, Bill Edwards. Who wasPitch’s—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Reid Dennis? Valentine: Reid Dennis was at Fireman’s Fund, so he was in a different formation butcertainly one of the pioneers.Anyhow, a number of people went to a government agency called the SBA,the Small Business Administration, where there was funding available, fairlycomplicated forms, you were borrowing money and you worried about theinterest and all the rest of this stuff. I preferred not to do business with thegovernment, which has been my lifelong preference to never do business withthe government.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And spell out why. Valentine: Because they are unpredictable, irrational. For instance, if I take money froma pension fund, any U.S. pension fund, the Department of Labor can decidenext week that it’s a bad idea for American pension funds to be invested inilliquid categories and stop it. And I said, I’m not interested in being inbusiness where there’s a unilateral behavior potential. I want to be in businesswhere the decisions are made by rational people at Yale University.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] I’m thinking of Yale’s situation at the moment [huge portfolioloss in the recession]. Valentine: Who is the guy who was the head of a U.S. bank [Export-Import Bank of theUnited States]? I can’t remember Bill’s last name.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [William H.] Draper. Valentine: Draper. He was another one who used the government SBA format. And myimpression is it worked fine for them. I don’t know anything about the details.I don’t know how it all worked. I just ruled it out as a category. You knowwho Willie Sutton is? Well, in a Willie Sutton orientation, you take the moneythat is in all the foundations in the U.S., all the endowments, all the mutualfunds in money management companies, and you probably have 85 percent ofthe investable funds in North America. So why go with the government? As apartner, they’re the partner of last choice from my point of view. It was thatsimple. I just went a different direction.Reid, as I think of it and maybe remember correctly, after he left theFireman’s Fund and raised a fund, his orientation was insurance companies.That might be because he was at the Fireman’s Fund for a while, and he wassteeped in the insurance business. They had lots of money, and I think Reidflourished by getting money from the insurance companies.So Sequoia was launched, thanks to Roger.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Really, you really hand it to him? Valentine: Well, he changed the law. Raising money was impossible under the prior law,and under Roger’s progressive relaxations of the law, raising money became arelatively simple and easy thing to do. Did you talk to [Thomas J.] Perkins?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. Valentine: Well, you can confirm with Tom, because he and I raised money at the sametime, roughly speaking.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right, you formed your companies at the same time. Valentine: And he didn’t go anywhere near the SBA, as I remember. He went the samedirection I did in the sense of—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: He told me that of all the well-known venture capitalists, he thought that hisstrategy was closest to yours. Would you agree? Valentine: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I don’t think the word SBA left his lips. I don’t think he was thinking of thatin particular. I think he was thinking of what we’ll presumably be getting to,namely operating experience and technical knowledge. Valentine: Well, I just thought of something and probably totally irrelevant. The peoplewho went to the SBA [tapping on table at mention of each name]: BillEdwards, Bill Bowes, Pitch Johnson, Bill Draper, all went to HarvardBusiness School. Tom Perkins went to Harvard Business School—overcameit.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [laughter] He liked Georges Doriot very much, though. He was invited to joinhis company and reneged. Valentine: I don’t know anything about that. When they were writing the Georges Doriotbook recently they called me for a comment. I told them I had no commentabout Georges Doriot; I never heard of him.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] Is that true? Valentine: He was never in the venture business that I recognized. He made aninvestment—one.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right, American Research and Development Corporation. Valentine: Digital Equipment Corporation.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, Digital, yes, right. Valentine: We made 750 investments.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, but he did precede you. Valentine: Never heard of him.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, you’re talking to an historian. Valentine: Historians sometimes magnify the impact of irrelevant events beyond theirutility.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [laughing] Well, so much for that category! Valentine: Right—moving right along.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All right, so we’ve got Sequoia Capital founded. Now who’s there? Do youhave partners right away? Valentine: No.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Have you cut all your strings? I mean you’re not doing this part-time; you’vedropped National [Semiconductor]? Valentine: I left the semiconductor business, National specifically, in 1972.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, we didn’t talk about why that was. I mean why was this now the time?Simply because you thought you had opportunities because of what Roger haddone? Valentine: Didn’t know about Roger then until after I left National. I decided that I hadlearned all I wanted to learn in the semiconductor business. I had managedthrough a lot of the things that were interesting and useful. It was going to berepetitive continuing, and the people at Capital Research and Managementoffered me the opportunity of a startup, investing institutional money intechnology areas. So I decided to go in an entirely different direction.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that somehow related to what you had been doing privately? Valentine: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I mean were you doing well? And you knew you were good at investing? Valentine: [pause] My struggle with the question is it’s an opportunity to be modest, andit’s unnatural for me to struggle being immodest.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [laughing] We’re not going to collapse if you actually are immodest. Valentine: When you’re starting companies it takes a while to know whether this is goingto work. And it’s one of the problems of building a firm like Sequoia, orTom’s firm, Kleiner Perkins. It takes a long time for a person to find, invest,and help a company achieve its natural success. It may be five years, it may besix years. So to say that I was successful, I don’t think I had enoughcompanies that I invested in in quantity, and they had not achieved enough inquality for me to be totally confident. In part, because I never had theresources to apply to these companies. As a company begins to succeed youhave to put more money into the proposition, and I didn’t have the moremoney to put into some of these companies. So their limitation was myinability to personally finance them.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. Valentine: Whew!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But you must have been liking it at some level. Valentine: Yes!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You’re saying it was too soon in the game to know whether your investmentswere actually going to be successful— Valentine: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But there are other things that you were picking up. Valentine: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And you liked that, but tell me more.You made it clear that these things areconnected, but you were still veering off from the path that you’d been trottingalong. So there had to be something that was pulling you, or some things. Valentine: I had a sense that my system of selection would work far more than itwouldn’t. But I didn’t have the resources to play Texas Hold ‘Em and putmore chips up. The opportunity to have a large discretionary pool of money tocontinue to support the investment ideas was the difference in theenvironment I was in, and the environment I was interested in going to. And,after twelve or thirteen years in the semiconductor business, I had a very highprofile reputation in this community. So people who were interested instarting companies often gravitated to me to help them start their company.From their point of view I had some money, and I knew how markets workedand how to help them position their company in the market. So I had a bit ofan unfair advantage in those two respects. But the most unfair advantage I hadis I knew what the future was, and very few people knew what the future was.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You’re speaking of a technological future, right? Valentine: Right. Having been at Fairchild, Bob Noyce’s name is on the patent for themicroprocessor. All of these products work because of a microprocessor, and Iknew that was coming. Both Fairchild and National— Intel was started on thatpremise; that’s the conversation I had with Bob. I knew what the future wasand had a fairly good idea of when that future would begin, and I wouldfinance companies where that future played an important role. Nobody elsewas from the semiconductor businesses, nobody else knew marketing, andnobody else knew the microprocessor.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: The nobodies being the venture capitalists. Valentine: The venture capitalists, yes. So I thought I had a good leg up: sponsorship,money, unique experience, and a special awareness of the future.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And name recognition in— Valentine: The technical community.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. Valentine: Here.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Which would be important. Valentine: Right, very. That’s why I didn’t have to know General Doriot.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] Yes. Valentine: I was going to work in the 408 area code, and he was somewhere, whereverthe heck Boston is.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, he was at Harvard.30 Valentine: So that’s how Sequoia launched, and those are the underlying principles onwhich I was confident to start an entirely new business in an entirely differentarea.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What was the first investment? Valentine: Atari.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That was a pretty good one, wasn’t it? Valentine: Full of microprocessors.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, so what year would that have been? Let’s see, Sequoia was 1972. Valentine: 1975.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So did it take three years or so to raise that first fund? Valentine: Less than that. Took me probably a year and a half. It took me some time tofigure out areas I wanted to be in, markets that I hadn’t previously beenlooking at, and I chose Atari.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Games. Valentine: Games.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, but it was because of the technology behind it. Valentine: Because of the microprocessor running the games.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So that eliminates a lot of choices, doesn’t it? Valentine: It does. See, I eliminated a lot of things. Among the things I decided at thebeginning was— I used to tell this to our limited partners, and they used tolook at me like I was completely nuts, not just partially nuts. I would tell themthat the world is flat, and when you go east past Denver you go off the edgeinto a technical oblivion, and there are no companies out there worthfinancing. So I’m staying right here. On the West Coast. Frederick JacksonTurner. I want to see that Pacific Ocean in the morning. And I chose a wholebunch of rules like that to govern the area in which we make our moneyprimarily or initially because we select a good business. But it’s the value-addthat we at Sequoia give this company for five or six years. We help them, withour Rolodex, build all of the features and abilities into these companies thatthey don’t personally possess, and I can’t do that if it’s in Atlanta or if it’s inCleveland.[Paragraph Mr. Valentine added during editing]:The ground rules governing investment selection at Sequoia: must be a verybig market; must be in Northern California; must be in advanced technology;must have high gross margin ability; must have the potential for Sequoia tomake $100 m[illion]; must be positively responsive to our active participation.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So geographic proximity has to be part of the mix. Valentine: Rigid. It is now almost 2010. Give me the name of another city in NorthAmerica, any state you like, that has created 1 percent of the great companiesas around here.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, the only place that I guess would come close would be the Boston, MIT,Route128 region. Valentine: That’s right, and your careful phrasing is true. It’s the only one that comesclose. It hit its peak and zenith in the era of the minicomputer business. It isn’teven accurate to say it’s the second best place in the country. It’s notcompetitive with this [region]. So, going to Minneapolis from Cleveland,there are these places—you’re flying towards less than you’re looking downat.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you didn’t see the point [of investing elsewhere]! Valentine: Gold was found twice in California.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right. Valentine: In Mountain View, California.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It seems a perfect segue into all the mythology that’s grown up around SiliconValley. People talk about the obvious ingredients, but I’d like to hear yourtake on it. Do you have an interesting way of explaining why this particularpiece of geography has been so successful in this industry? Valentine: I have ten interesting ways, none of which, to me, are the answer. This is asubject that probably has opened more bottles of wine than any other singlesubject. Why did it happen here? Tony Tan [Keng Yam] was here at lunch onetime and asked the question. Tony Tan was then the assistant prime ministerof Singapore, and I said in answer to his question, it was luck. He wouldn’tbuy that. Try great universities. There are lots of places with greatuniversities, all over Europe; great universities in China. Why here? Whywhen it happened? Now, it’s called Silicon Valley for a reason. Silicon is themodern equivalent of petroleum for the unholy alliance made betweenStandard Oil and General Motors way back when. But now there’s siliconeverywhere—Japan, China, Texas, all over. Why? And I have to tell you that Idon’t think there is a single answer, even one that has multiple ingredients thatexplain it.One of the arguments that I think is very compelling is, once you get a successmomentum moving, the young people will leave Fairchild or Intel and go tothe next startup because of wealth creation. So you can throw into the mixstock options and an exceptionally vibrant stock market from 1975 to 1995 orlonger if you like to include a few more years. There are so many elementsaround which you can make a very, very passionate argument that none ofthem, in my opinion, stand alone. But in aggregate, nothing like it existselsewhere, or has ever existed elsewhere. Think about a Japanese man leavinga good job, starting a company that fails. He’d have to commit suicide. Welove to finance people who have tried and failed; they have really somethingto prove. Think of the rigidity of the Germans.A company we didn’t finance was up and running, made very good software.The founder of the company understood without any help that he didn’t wantto run the company; he wanted someone else to run the company. He was inSacramento; he was near an air force base. He hired a retiring colonel.[rapping the table] Now this is the typical software company—with dogs inthe building, bicycles in the building, everyone’s wearing jeans and t-shirts. Ihad this intuition about this colonel. And I said, sort of in the politicalframework, “What are you going to do for the first hundred days?” He said,“The dogs are out. Those goddamn bicycles are out. Those haircuts—we’regoing to look—.” I said, “Why? Why is that relevant? Who cares if there’s adog here, or twenty–two dogs? We’re in the software business. Why do youcare? The guy bought a bicycle that cost more than a car! He wants it [rappingtable] inside.” So it’s a matter of finding passion that’s connected to reality.The reality is, in a software company whatever happens happens. Andhaircuts, dress code— Has anybody seen Steve Jobs in other than jeans and ablack mock t-shirt in twenty years? [<|endoftext|>
Interviewer chuckles] It’s not relevant!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, it is relevant, but in the opposite way than what you’re describing. Valentine: Yes, that’s why big companies fail. See if Steve went for a job interview atHP, instead of starting Apple in 1978 when we financed it, he wouldn’t havegotten a job! They’d look at him and say, “You look like Ho Chi Minh.”There are relevant things that people do, and things that are just happenings ofan era.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Don’t you think that success is the background to all this? That you cantolerate anything, or virtually anything, as long as you’re building successfulcompanies. Valentine: Yes, and Tom [Perkins], if you ask him, turned down Apple because he metSteve and Steve was dressed the way Steve dresses. And he said, “Pfff. Thisguy doesn’t look professional.” He wasn’t. He was 19! He hadn’t gone toschool. He had sandals, jeans, and a t-shirt and a Ho Chi Minh beard.Atari—you go on the factory tour and the marijuana in the air would knockyou to your knees—where they were manufacturing the product. We hadboard meetings in a hot tub, with bottles of Ripple floating around the hot tub![<|endoftext|>
Interviewer chuckles] There are no rules that say that certain behavior produces aresult that’s directly related to the behavior. I think when you do that you getbig companies that die, like our automotive companies. They have so manyrules, so many things that they do and have long since forgotten why, that ittakes a different attitude. Now, I don’t go around advocating marijuanasmoking in the manufacturing area, but that’s the way Nolan [Bushnell] ranthe company.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You might have said something if the company wasn’t doing well. Valentine: Yes, but what would I say—get a higher brand of marijuana? Get a betterbottle of wine than is floating in the hot tub?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] Well, you would have pulled out. Valentine: There are a lot of opinions about why this place succeeded. And most of themare comparable—you compare them to other places. And the city I would giveyou, it has a few monuments nobody understands or gets, is Seattle. You havethe number one sports company in America, Nike. It’s a sensational company!You have Microsoft, of course, that’s sort of getting to the hardening-of-thearteries phase. And you have Amazon out there lurking. Pretty nicecompanies, small community, not famous universities but nice universities,generate a lot of engineers and everything, fabulous quality-of-life place ifyou don’t mind a little rain, or a little more than a little rain. But people loveliving there. No state tax.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Are you saying, but it’s still not Silicon Valley? Valentine: Yes, but if you’re looking for comparables, everybody always says, “Well,how about North Carolina and the Golden Triangle, whatever they call it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Research Triangle [Park]. Valentine: Research Triangle. Nothing’s ever happened. State money, federal money,university money—show me the monuments! No monuments. Seattle hasmonuments. Seattle is not recognized, particularly, as a technology area.There’s no Harvard, there’s no MIT, but all of those places, wherever youwant to go, have produced nothing. And I don’t know why. I have no ideahow close Boston is to England, psychologically.Now one of the things I didn’t mention is that Silicon Valley has and hashad—we have a huge, huge continuous influx of Orientals. If you sat in ourlobby for a week, you would think we were a prejudiced employer becausethere are very few Caucasians. Huge numbers of Chinese, Indians,Japanese—you name the flavors of all Southeast Asia. And we have had themfor years. They are highly desirable to the engineering and sciencedepartments as graduate students and research fellows. And we have the dumblaw, protected by the Senate, that only allows a certain number of visas a yearto allow these people to come. I can’t believe senators are willing to sound sostupid in print, but they claim that they’re protecting American jobs. However,we’re talking about 30,000 people, all of whom have master’s degrees. Andthey’re here for PhDs. We don’t want you. You are going to take the job atMcDonald’s?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, the research universities are saying the same thing. Valentine: They want these people!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, of course they do. Valentine: And yes, they don’t all stay. But you have the benefit of their genius whenthey’re here. They make reasonable instructors, great researchers, et cetera.And we have our government fighting against attracting the best and brightest.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Are the two venture capital organizations [NVCA and WAVC] lobbying ordoing something to try to turn government policy around in this area? Valentine: I don’t know. I have to tell you that I never accepted an invitation toWashington, DC. I would never go there to lobby a senator.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And why? Valentine: I think the prospect of their listening and understanding—it doesn’t get themany votes! It doesn’t get them any contributions. “Why are you here to seeme?” These are not patriots who are in the Senate. These are low-IQ peoplewho have an agenda of staying elected. So no, I don’t talk to senators aboutthe obvious. If you don’t see it and get it, it isn’t a matter of Roger Kennedyexplaining a better world. If you don’t understand that 30,000 visas is nothingon a base of 300 million people—if we had 60,000 or 160,000 it would haveno impact on employment. If you have to explain things like that by traveling3,000 miles, I’m not your man!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] Shall we do one more question and then stop? Valentine: Well, if I like the question.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It’s a very practical one. At the beginning it’s just you, the way you’redescribing it, but with this whole network and set of experiences behind you.When and why do you decide to take on partners? Valentine: [Mr. Valentine added this paragraph during editing]:Adding new talent was and remains a continuous process: conventionaleducation was never a high priority. We look for people with functionalexperience in a startup, i.e., design and application engineering, productmarketing, sales, aspects of out-sourcing manufacturing. Our investmentdecision-making process requires very self-confident people—able to bechallenged publicly. At Sequoia, we all get credit and recognition forinvesting in Apple, Cisco, Google, and we all assume the mistakes of poorinvestment choices. We are team investment partners at Sequoia. We prideourselves on our differences and the methodology by which we develop ourindividual opinions. We have one acronym we are religious about:ROT—return on time. Most people are generally sensitive about the conceptof not throwing good money after bad. To us time is only invested where thereturn prospects do not require candles and prayers.The ability to manage a startup as an investor requires a huge amount of time.Our limited partners like the University of California or Yale would remind usthat you need more people to help these companies; you need people beyondjust yourself. If you want to have a larger fund, you need more people. If youmake five investments in the beginning each year, you’re accumulating allthese investments, there’s no liquidity events happening, so you end up withmaybe twenty companies. Impossible to provide them with the time andattention which they deserve. So you begin to look for peopleI look for people that are as far as possible different than I am, because we dothings here on the basis of consent among the partners. And I don’t likehaving a homogenized set of opinions. I want as much confrontation anddifferent thinking as possible. So we are slow and cumbersome making ourdecisions because we’re trying to find out everything that’s relevant. This is abusiness where the Socratic technique— First of all you have to figure out thequestions that are relevant, then you have to ask them. And you have tounderstand the answer in the context of what it is you’re trying to do. And youcan’t do that forever alone. It just requires more people.[Paragraph added by Mr. Valentine during editing]:Venture partnerships are very unstable—they blow up a lot. The building of apartnership is very hard, and the least difficult issue is compensation, which isover the top. It is a rare partnership that makes the transition to a secondgeneration of management. As an example, I have not managed Sequoia for atleast the last eight or nine years, and we have been better than ever. It is clearto me who our next managing partners will be. We have two now, and willhave two new ones within this decade. This stability is part of why we havehad the same limited partners for almost 40 years. Stability and returns is howSequoia is positioned.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: The fact that the limited partners were asking you to nurture these companies,I’m imaging it wasn’t because they had any particular interest in the welfareof the company. They wanted their investment protected, right? Valentine: Yes. They didn’t stress the idea of nurturing the company for the benefit ofthe company. It’s clearly nurturing the company for the benefit of their return.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, but where does that balance work out for Sequoia? Because your limitedpartners are staring you in the eye and saying, “Where’s this fabulous returnyou’re promising us?” So how much energy are you putting into making thesecompanies successful enough so you can get your money out, and how muchdo you really care about building a good company? Valentine: The different people—some are much more needy than others. Someone likeSteve Jobs, a completely uneducated individual, is one of the bestinterrogators that I have ever either seen or heard. Somehow or other he knewwhat to focus on and how to build a sequence and series of questions thatwere additive to the answers, sometimes from witnesses that were reluctant.We have other guys who fumble and stumble and don’t know their wayaround.One of my favorite stories— What happens in a conference room like this, wehave people come and pitch us for financing. And it’s storytelling—can youtell a story? Huge numbers of them have no idea how to explain theirbusiness. And they come in and they ramble on and on and on. So one daythere were two Sequoia people, three people from a company, and the guywas just making no sense, no progress. And I said, “Let’s have a timeout.Here’s my card. We’re going to come back in ten minutes and I want you towrite your business plan on the back of my card.” And he says, “That’simpossible.” And the other two guys on the team, clearly were loving this,because they didn’t understand it either! And we went away and [came back].You can imagine, the card was almost all ink. But he did an infinitely betterjob having thought about it, focused on the few messages he wanted to getacross that were not full of all this extraneous barrage of data but not facts.And it seemed like a cruel thing to do, and I didn’t do it for that reason, [but]because I wasn’t getting the pitch. And we have a concept around here calledROT, R-O-T [spells], and it means Return on Time. We can’t afford to havefour partners sitting in this room, and somebody explaining something, andI’m not getting it. Now it’s not we’re not getting it because it’s superscientific and we don’t understand it—it’s the storytelling technique. It’s thebuilding of the idea, the size of the market, the degree of the technical risk toget this product finished. Who’s going to care? And explaining that in a verysimple way, we can tell that that person is somebody we want to be inbusiness with. And it takes sometimes just lots of time, because he has noRolodex. He has never rented a building. He has never opened a bank account.I mean, the list of the things that you would think of that he has never done iseverything! Because he’s not been in business, and he didn’t learn how to doall that stuff.So finding Steve is rare. You have to overcome the shock of his appearance.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I remember reading that of all the people who you’ve met in yourcareer, that there were two people that you call visionaries. And one of them,as you might expect, is Steve Jobs and the other one was Bob Noyce. Valentine: That’s right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you see their talents as similar? Valentine: No, no. Steve is the brutal manager. He’s very smart. Bob was a very lighthands-on-the-steering-wheel manager, very, very brilliantly educated,fabulous scientific mind. One stupid habit—smoking. So they’re entirelydifferent and both work. Both systems and techniques of management work;but they work differently.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You call them visionaries. What does that mean to you? Valentine: That they had the vision. When we invested in Apple, the Apple computerdidn’t exist. Nobody had a personal computer. The cheapest computer was$250,000. And Steve’s vision was, we’re going to make them so thateverybody will have one. Pretty simple.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you just dealing with Jobs? You weren’t worrying about [Steve]Wozniak? Valentine: The important questions were asked by Jobs. The important answers weregiven by Jobs. Steve Wozniak—and this is not meant to be a criticism—wasthe color commentator, if you understand the difference between the personwho watches and explains the play by play in the baseball game or the footballgame, and the other guy has the color on what just happened. Both werecritical to the operation. Neither could have been employed by a regularcompany because of the way they looked and the way they communicated.We at Sequoia are sometimes criticized for financing companies that areimpossible. The financing of Cisco [Systems] was— We financed two peoplethat were incredibly impossible, one of whom was a woman. They had a greatidea. In a sense, you can augment management, you can help them with morepeople that are highly qualified. And that’s why this [raps a book] is animportant thing for you to read—we invest on the size and dynamics of themarket. I don’t care if Genghis Khan is running the company; we’ll giveGenghis Khan some help. And give me a giant market—always. [Referring toLinda Norton at the camera] The whistleblower is silently whistling twoseconds.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why don’t we stop there? Valentine: Okay.[Mr. Valentine asked off-tape to orchestrate, uninterrupted, the beginning ofthe second interview.] Valentine: So the beginning that I intend to go through quickly is a 30,000-foot levelview of how I got from the university to the founding of Sequoia Capital andthe implementation of a technology investment program.We’re starting in 1954 when I graduated, got done with the formal educationalpart of my launch in life—and the focus always was a focus on science andspecifically electronics. As was customary in the mid-fifties, I did some timein the military, both at Fort Monmouth and Fort George Meade, both of whichwere technology bases on the East Coast. My entire duration at those sites wasinvolved in electronics, both studying it and teaching it.After the two years or so in the military, I moved on and joined an East Coastcompany by the name of Sylvania, with locations in New York State and NewEngland and Pennsylvania. I was at Sylvania, again in a totally electronicimmersion, from 1957 to 1959. I changed and briefly worked for Raytheon, asimilar kind of electronics company, although they were more oriented towardthe military than Sylvania, which was quite oriented towards consumerproducts like televisions. My stay at Raytheon ended in 1960, and this was amajor transition point in time.In 1960, I moved to California, which was a big change from living in theEast, and, second, I joined Fairchild Semiconductor, a startup companylocated in Silicon Valley. I began with Fairchild in Los Angeles, totallyimmerged in semiconductors, in electronics. I was with Fairchild from 1960,initially in Los Angeles, until 1962, at which time I moved to Mountain View,California, the heartland of Silicon Valley. In 1967, I moved from Fairchild toNational Semiconductor, another semiconductor company totally immersed inelectronics kinds of work.So very, very early in 1971, I decided to do something radically different. Idecided I had figured out and found what the future was going to be, both inspecifics in electronics, as well as where it was going to be. And it was goingto be in Silicon Valley, based on my experience in Mountain View,California. I started Sequoia Capital, very early 1972. Up until the present, aswe are looking at concluding calendar year 2009, we have been in thebusiness of starting companies, not totally focused in electronics, butoverwhelmingly focused in electronics. We have probably financed 700-oddcompanies, and using that round number, out of that 700 probably 670 wereelectronics companies, all of which were a natural selection and decision of40the prior years of being involved in, oriented, and committed to the electronicsfuture, which was just sort of beginning.It’s hard to remember, just thinking about 1960, that we didn’t have a lot ofthe things that are on the table [in this conference room]. There were nopersonal computers, there was no polycom telephone, there were nocalculators, there were no iPhones. None of that existed when I began theexperience of being in Silicon Valley. Now, we’re going to pause herebecause I’m having some trouble talking, so I need some lubrication.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] The tea that you like.Crawford: The coughing is picking up nicely [on the tape]. Valentine: Yes, I’m good at it. I’ve been coughing since Thanksgiving.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, wow. Valentine: So now is the time to question, from your point of view, because my streamof-consciousness interest is less structured, more detailed, but covers the sametime.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So do I enter in here? Valentine: I just gave you your line, and you’re supposed to dance onto the stage fromthe right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] Well, here I come. And I am on the right. I should have said thisat the beginning, but the monologue, which did not last fifteen minutes as youpredicted, was at your request. And that’s fine, because I think it reflectssomething about Donald T. Valentine. Valentine: We didn’t get to the monologue yet.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, we didn’t? Valentine: All you had was the prelude foundation. We went from 30,000 feet, and nowwe’ll go down to ten feet.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well then, I would ask you to tie in that capsule history with what you thinkabout venture capital. You mentioned the heavy emphasis onelectronics—now why was that? And how could you predict the future? Let’slink all this stuff that’s happened to you in the past and makes you what youare now and had something to do with how you went about venture capital.Does that fit in with your free-wheeling? Valentine: Okay. Do have any other questions?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, I have a lot, but let’s just deal with that first. Valentine: Because it’s easier to integrate them simultaneously than to go back.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well then, one of the things I really want you to talk about comes from thatconversation on the phone that we had when you were in Montana. And it’sabout your friend Lerasche and— Valentine: [William S.] Lerach.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Lerach, okay, hard ch, and how that incident applies to your policy aboutdocuments at Sequoia. I also have a lot of questions about how you go aboutinvestment. You know, why you do this, why you don’t do that. Valentine: You’re going to become a competitor?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: No. [chuckling] That was not in my mind. Valentine: These do not have to be historically perfectly linked because you’re going tocut and edit anyway, and you can put the Lerach story wherever you want it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: No, I’m not. Because the way we do our oral histories is that we keep themintact. We edit for clarity but we don’t move things around. Valentine: Oh really? Hmm.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It’s supposed to reflect how you think about things, not how I think aboutthings, although I realize my questions may lead you in different directions. Valentine: What led me to the conclusion that I made that’s wrong is the movie that I’malso working on, and it’s the same material. And they cut and paste whereverthey want the things. I mean I can talk about something and then they want togo ten years earlier and fifteen years later.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, well, they’re doing a different kind of documentation. They’re probablytrying to sell it to a major network and appeal to a general audience. We’retrying to get down history, some of which will be boring, but it presumablyshows how things evolved. Instead of sound bites, it’s a continual tape. Valentine: So we’ll put Bill [Lerach] in here. [pause] Okay, ready?Crawford: Taping. Valentine: This is at least advertised and intended to be a somewhat historic stream ofconsciousness. Unlike the prior observations at 10,000 feet or 30,000 feet, thisis going to be a lot more from my point of view, a key word kind of flow,because there are words that have evolved in the evolution and the creation ofSilicon Valley that are personally meaningful and probably meaningful to allof your other participants.We’ve started so that you understand the platform in California that I existedin and on was Fairchild Semiconductor, a very, very modern and advancedtechnology company that made products in 1960 that no one else in the worldmade. It was that company I selected to join in 1960, and I joined in LosAngeles in sales. The customers in those days were the major military andaerospace companies that existed and still exist in Los Angeles. They werebuilding then, and are building now, weapons systems that require veryadvanced capabilities in electronics. And that was my initial involvement inthe electronics industry in California. Circumstantially, it turns out that all ofthe users and customers were in the greater Los Angeles area, but all of thesemiconductor companies, like Fairchild, were in Northern California, whicheventually became identified as Silicon Valley.The company I joined was a startup and had a very difficult time gettingfinanced. The rather interesting—and this is one of those six degrees ofseparation kind of stories— The company was initially financed by ArthurRock, who is one of your other victims, and Arthur had a very hard timewas rare. It was the exception to the rule. All of the money in 1960, or the latefifties more accurately when Fairchild was financed, was in the East.Basically, Arthur found that no one was really interested in financing a whiz-bang science company 3,000 miles away with a whole bunch of people theynever heard of.So Arthur, creatively, contacted a man by the name of Sherman Fairchild,who was the chairman of a company in his name. His family, the Fairchildfamily, was at one point in time the largest shareholder in IBM. So it was afamily that knew about science, knew about electronics, was deeply investedin the premium electronics company in the world—IBM—and was veryfascinated by what the science was going on in Mountain View, California. SoFairchild was financed through a public company corporate vehicle. The nameof the company was Fairchild Camera and Instrument, and it was throughFairchild Camera and Instrument that we got financing. The interesting ironyis the president of Fairchild Camera and Instrument, with all of their assetsand entities in the East, happened to be—and I think it helped a lot—happenedto be a graduate of Stanford and had in his heart some historic interest in thearea and interest in the Stanford community.So, the company was off and running, financed, ’57 and ’58, and I joined andwas one of the early employees in sales in Los Angeles. The year endingbefore I joined the company had a few million dollars in revenue, so it wasreally a small startup company. The first year I was in the company in LosAngeles, and in the Los Angeles military complex, I sold personally more ofFairchild’s product than they had sold in the history of the company, andcertainly more than the prior year.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Are going to talk about what your approach was? How you could do that? Valentine: OK. There’s no special cleverness; there is no lack of interest on my part. Butthere are other parts of the history here that do have more innovation and morecleverness. It was just understanding what the customer’s technical problemwas, and understanding what the Fairchild Semiconductor solution was, andbeing able to explain to the customer what it was and how it worked. The waystartups work, it’s you have very few people but they’re all one extendedteam. And the person who ran Fairchild Semiconductor, who basically endedup with his name on the patent for the microcircuit—Bob Noyce. Thecustomers we were dealing with, the opportunities were so big, if I had atechnical problem that the customer couldn’t resolve and I couldn’t resolvewith them, Noyce would fly to Los Angeles and come see the customer. So ifthere was a secret, I had a genius as an application engineer.So because it was a startup and it was doing well, all the natural evolution ofpromotions, having joined in 1960, by 1964 I was the worldwide salesmanager for the company. And the company’s rate of doing business was now$100 million, and we were doing business all over the U.S. and in WesternEurope.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What was the scope of its operations when you joined in 1960? Valentine: Revenues in 1959 had been approximately $1 million.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Worldwide? Valentine: Same $1 million.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Fairchild had tentacles all over the world, even when you joined? Valentine: Oh, I’m not responding to the question you might be asking. I’m notresponding to what the sales were of Fairchild Camera, I’m only respondingto what the Fairchild Semiconductor division sales were. So you can say, priorto my arrival, they were zero, and by the end of 1964 they were $100 million.Now, you have to understand that in addition to there being very clever peopleat Fairchild, this product was spectacular. Once you could get the customer tounderstand it and how it worked, it was exceptionally easy to persuade themto buy. It was a matter of spending time with people who were dealing withthis kind of a solution for the first time in their life.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you find you had a natural facility for explaining technology? Valentine: Yes, that’s what all of the years [of experience] were. Because among thethings that I did in the military was teaching senior officers in the army howthese electronic systems would allow them to fight battles differently. It’s sortof amusing. When I encountered the military, the tanks—now this is clearlypost-World War II right, which was a tank war. The tanks were in a part of thearmy called the cavalry, sort of like John Wayne and horses and that kind ofstuff. The people who ran the cavalry, and therefore the tank corps, stillthought like John Wayne, and they had no idea how to use radar; they had noidea how to use the communication systems, which were very crude. Theywould stand up in the tanks and yell to one another. It was theircommunication system. Now, a tank has no muffler, so when you have tentanks going, it’s more sound than you can believe.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: The other obvious key here is you understood the technology. I imagine youhad to get up to speed in a specific product— Valentine: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: If it’s a very tight company, not only small but obviously communicating,that’s not going to be a problem either, right? Valentine: Right, and that’s what all of this quick 30,000-foot view explaining all thetime I spent in electronics and progressively higher orders of technologyallowed me to get to a point in 1960 where I understood things that werehappening and about to happen that other people didn’t know about.So, Silicon Valley, early mid-60s—an explosively exciting place. Newcompanies are forming, people are on the move going from one company toanother.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now how do explain that? It wasn’t called Silicon Valley, but you’re alreadymentioning that there were companies in Northern California. Why thissudden flowering? Valentine: The best answer to the question is I don’t know. The second answer to thequestion takes about two days to explain, at the end of which I’m not satisfiedwith my answer. [<|endoftext|>
Interviewer chuckles] What happened here has never happenedelsewhere in the world, in technology. If you take the automotive industry andgo back to 1900, Silicon Valley’s name then was Detroit. There were dozensand dozens and dozens of car companies, companies that made total cars aswell as companies who made fenders and parts and radios. You had a hugeindustry. The technology being created there was brand new, and there were alot of very brilliant people—Henry Ford—that established that part of theworld as the center. Now, I have no more idea why that [automotive industry]was chosen for Detroit, because nobody blows a whistle and says, “Okay,everybody move to Detroit.”What happens is, in the case of Silicon Valley, the universities attract differentkinds of people for their advanced education. One of the great advantagesSilicon Valley has always had is we have been very fortunate to have a hugepopulation of immigrants. I have to guess that something similar happened inDetroit, or any other technical revolution where something that didn’t existbefore suddenly became the way things were happening.If you just start in 1900 and do a fast study of the first twenty-five years ofDetroit, you’d probably find the similar kinds of phenomena that happenedhere. But I have no idea what the formula is, because people from all over theworld have been coming here trying to find out what the DNA sample is thatthey can take and go back to Sweden or South America or someplace andreplicate Silicon Valley. And no one’s replicated it, because no one’s figuredout the DNA. How important are the immigrants? Very. How important isBerkeley? Extremely. When I refer to Berkeley I’m talking about theuniversity. There were assets here that were here, and they were just exploitedin different ways by the people who came here.One of the very incredibly clever things that Stanford University allowed, ormaybe even beyond allowing, encouraged—they encouraged their faculty toget involved with the local technology companies: be advisors, be consultants,be on the board, participate. I’m trying to remember the name of the companyand I’m not succeeding. The current president of Stanford [John L. Hennessy]took a leave of absence about maybe fifteen or seventeen years ago. He wasthen one of the senior people in the management of the engineeringdepartment at Stanford, left the school on a sabbatical, spent about two ortwo-and-a-half years doing a start-up semiconductor company financed theway we finance all other companies. It was very successful; he made money;he came back to Stanford, went through the steps he was going to go throughjust two-and-a-half years later, and became the president. Lots of schoolsdon’t have that willingness to take the best and brightest and launch themoutside the university. And in the case of John, he did that.So that’s part of the environment. How important is that? Hard to weigh anyof the unusual features that exist here that you don’t find elsewhere, and hardto put a precise value on them and speculate if you didn’t have that capability,would the place have been that successful? So, as I warned you, it’s a verylong-winded, unsatisfactory answer about why Silicon Valley happened herewhen it did. It was just a confluence. Hewlett-Packard had already been here,Varian had already been here—Ampex. There were the beginning of majorcompanies in the technology business, and it didn’t happen overnight.I’m sure some clever marketing guy, whose name is Regis McKenna, came upwith the term Silicon Valley. Silicon Valley used to end, by the way, in midPalo Alto or even slightly north of mid-Palo Alto. It now goes down waybeyond San Jose. So it’s more of a state of mind to me than a geographichappening. It’s the can-do kind of place, in contrast to other places in theworld where there are lots of restrictions and things that are limitations.Anyhow, we’re rolling. As a result of the success, lots of companies started.There was a very hot stock market for IPOs; these are initial public offerings.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What era are you in? Valentine: We’re about 1964-65. Companies were going public left and right, net worthis being built famously. People are doing well, companies are expanding,companies are acquiring one another.A very clever lawyer, by the name of Lerach, figured out a terrific businessfor plaintiff lawyers. He would take the position that the companies that wentpublic did a number of things that violated the securities laws, and he wouldsue them.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Such as what kind of violations? Valentine: No, I don’t want to go into that. The violation that was most typical is that thesecurity laws are extremely complex, and they didn’t take the right number ofcautious steps to be in compliance with different laws that had been on thebooks. Mainly, what Mr. Lerach wanted was a hunting license. He wouldwrite up a very small, vicious brief, submit it, the suit was launched againstthe company and its directors, and what he wanted was the ability to dodiscovery. He wanted his lawyers and himself to be able to go into thecompany’s records and find out what they did right and what they did wrong.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was this new in the law? Valentine: Yes. It was new in the way law was practiced, in the exploitation byindividual plaintiff lawyers, that you’d sue and find out the facts later. Thelawsuit was based on what they found in the company’s records. Very earlyon a number of us recognized the threat that Lerach and company representedbecause they were suing the directors of the board, the venture capitalists, aswell as the management.So, at this point in time, early 60s, mid-60s, we had disk drives. We hadability to store records so it wasn’t paper. To me, storing pieces of paper infiles is a complete waste of time. I outlawed files [at Sequoia]; I outlawedstoring pieces of paper. We basically were trying to be more efficient, andalso to not have any information that would potentially help the Bill Lerachsof the world and the plaintiff lawyers as a category.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now this was a policy as soon as you founded Sequoia? Valentine: No, it happened a little later, because when I founded Sequoia the cost ofthese kind of memory systems was more expensive than they’ve proven to be,and I wasn’t as sensitized to how useless is the filing system in Americancompanies. Somebody will have a piece of paper come across his desk, and hedoesn’t really know what to do with it. So he writes a little note on it andgives it to his assistant and says, “File this.” So you have a useless piece ofpaper, now in folder, that nobody understands the title of, and you’d neverwant to retrieve it anyway because you couldn’t, because she has no idea whyshe filed it where she did. So the whole concept of filing was a hugemonumental cost and waste of time. So I outlawed it, and it turned out—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But [you were also reacting to] the Lerach situation? Valentine: That was a confirmation of a good decision made previously. There’s no pointin having files, regardless of whether there was a plaintiff law firm outhunting. So everything we do, every investment we make, there’s a law firminvolved of our choice. The law firm is involved in writing all of thedocuments. So they’re written in a particularly arcane language that only thelawyers can understand, and they memorialize all of this stuff the same wayfor each IPO. So why would we need a file? The have it in their file. We can’tread it anyway because they’ve written it in a code. So my position was keepthe paper there; I don’t ever want it here. That was one of the otherconvictions about why not to have files: someone else already had them.Every year we’re audited. Well, the law requires the auditor to have a file. Sohe has our audit record and the supporting statements in his file. So we don’tneed to have any of that stuff.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, that’s true for activities with a strong legal basis. But what about thepartners sitting around a table trying to figure whether to invest or not? Isthere no documentation of things like that? Valentine: Very, very little. There are papers that are created prior to each investment. Atthe end of the investment cycle, we say yes or no. In both cases we throw thepapers away.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Really! But at times that must screw you up, right? You’re really reliant onthe human memory, which we all know is very fallible. Valentine: No, because these things are highly regulated; there are laws governing thesethings. There’s a law firm and an accounting firm that we hire on eachtransaction; they have the records. In the case of the law firm, we can’t readthe damn writing anyway! So there’s no point in having it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How pervasive is this sort of philosophy? Valentine: No idea.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. Valentine: No idea.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You think that some venture capital partnerships are still keeping records inthe same old-fashioned way? Valentine: I hope not. It’s just a waste of money.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, and, as you’re implying, opening yourself up to legal problems. Wereyou ever sued by Lerach? Valentine: I used to know the answer. I have been sued at least ten times, ten differentcompanies. The lawsuit was the same violation of security rules—whateverthat is. Three times I’ve been sued by Bill Lerach. One time he did thedeposition in person, and at one point in time my name and the Sequoia namewere on his Web site as examples of people he sued a lot.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How did that make you feel? Valentine: If I took things like that seriously I’d have felt like, you know, kind of publicenemy number 104, or something. It was extortion—my word; I think otherpeople agree that it’s an appropriate word. Nobody ever did anything wrong.Ten lawsuits—there was never a trial, because what happens is, the plaintifflawyers have figured this out. In one of these typical small venturecompanies, there may be six or eight people on the board: some of the officerswho run the company, some of the people like me that finance the company,and some outside directors who bring special expertise. The lawsuit goes onfor a while, without the board being involved, because the lawyers are doingwhat they call discovery. Our lawyer and Lerach are discovering what thefacts are.At some point in time, after they grind up enough hours that you have to paythem for, they hold up their hand and say, “$7 million is what it takes to settle;we want $7 million.” And they’re representing shareholders. They get 30percent of the $7 million, so their ask, their extortion ask, is $7 million. We ofcourse have had an insurance policy in place all the time, and early on wefound out that Lerach, the plaintiff lawyer, and the insurance company—andpossibly our lawyer—have been talking about what the extortion numbershould be: $7 million is the answer. We have a fully paid-up [insurance]policy that says $10 million. So, “Okay, we agree. We’ll give you $7 million.”And the insurance company says, “Not so fast. If you agree that the damagesare $7 million, we will only pay $4.5 million.” And you’d say, “Well, wait aminute, we’ve been paying insurance on a policy for $10 million.” “Well,we’re not convinced that $7 million in damages have happened, so we’d liketo have more lawyering go on, but we’re not going to give you $7 million.”50So I go from this room, with the insurance company that I thought was on ourside, to the next room where our lawyer explains it. Then I go into the nextmillion. It’s ridiculous.” So we have that conversation. And no one’s on yourside! Everybody’s getting paid except me, right? All the lawyers get paid bymillion to settle, and the insurance company is only going to give a little morethan half.And that’s how everything ends—never a trial. Bill Lerach does not want todo trials. He just wants to put a little fear into the directors. He wants to bleedmillion, with partial coverage by the insurance company.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you couldn’t do any better with the insurance company? Valentine: No, we tried changing insurance companies—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because this figure is just pulled out of the air, right? Valentine: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So how do you prove or disprove it? Valentine: You have more lawyer hours engaged.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] To say nothing of your time. Valentine: Yes, I’m the only person not getting paid!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. Valentine: Let’s end this!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: This happened ten times to you? Valentine: Ten times.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why did Lerach go to prison? Valentine: I have to tell you that in my thirty-odd years of investing, I’ve come across alot of very smart people. Unfortunately, Mr. Lerach is one of them.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right along with Bob Noyce? Valentine: Well, no not in that class. But Lerach created a business in which he and hisfirm, and other plaintiff law firms, made hundreds of millions of dollars a yearin revenue for their law firms. Lerach was a huge donor to the DemocraticParty, and he used to stay in the White House. He was a guest of the president.So, you know, I’m not dealing with some Podunk lawyer who has noconnections. Huge amount of wealth, but he got careless.The plaintiff lawyers represent the shareholders, and what happens is theyhave so many complaints they list the plaintiffs alphabetically. Well, yourname was first, your name was second, your name was third—in lawsuit afterlawsuit after lawsuit after lawsuit. So finally one of our lawyers asked me sortof jokingly, “Do you know any of these people? Are they suing you onpurpose, personally?” Well, it turns out they just had a list of people that wereprofessional plaintiffs, and they got careless, and they didn’t change the listand didn’t tell the people they were plaintiffs. So what our law firm did is theywent after the plaintiffs, and they deposed the plaintiffs and found out, “Well,God, I’ve never heard of this company. I’m not suing them.” So the law firmswent after Lerach’s company because he was now in violation of the securitylaw.Before I ruin my entire day we have to get off Lerach. But the conclusion ofthe story, and it’s one of those only-in-America possibilities, Lerach andcompany agree, “We’re guilty.” Now we’ll negotiate the fines and thepenalties and the prison time. So they do all of that stuff, and [sighs] it’s sucha highlight day in my life. I found the record. When he was being sentenced,the judge said, “Mr. Lerach, there are three prisons, and you may chooseamong the three prisons which one you go to. We’ll arrange so you can visitthe prisons, meet with the head of the prison, and find out which prison youwould, such as you can prefer, to be in.” And I thought to myself, Jesus!Where’s Wyatt Earp and those kind of guys when I need them? So he goesand visits these prisons, and he makes a choice, and he wanted to be sure hisprison suite had a southwest view and— Oh my God! I couldn’t believe it.Anyhow, no more on Lerach; that’s the end of the Lerach story.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All right, so where are we in your story? Valentine: We’re in the mid-sixties, and Fairchild was phenomenally successful andbecame the fountainhead for spinouts: people leaving; people going to starttheir own companies. And this was about the period of time when all kinds ofcompanies were being started. I started financing them personally, makingsmall investments in a small number of companies where I knew what thescience was and—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Just from money that you had saved? Valentine: Yes. So you have a company now, 1965, public, $150 million in sales, hugebrand name—one of the biggest brand names in the business. All kinds ofcompanies were starting around us, and I began financing using an approachderived from the way we made engineering decisions. 1967—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I don’t understand what you said just then—a derivative approach? Valentine: Business was so good that we had more opportunities than we had engineers,and we devised a bit of an ad hoc technique for evaluating differentcompanies before we would commit our engineering resources to work withthem on a specific project. We had to understand the nature of the applicationand understand the size of the market. There are a number of highlight kind ofthings that we did before we committed engineering. Having evolved thatsystem, I used the same system to make small personal investments incompanies that were all physically located here and where I understood thescience. And it was probably as much a hobby as not, because I would makemore money on Fairchild’s stock than I would make in any of theseinvestments, because I didn’t have enough money to support too manycompanies at the same time. So it was an interesting, highly useful hobby.We went on, in 1967, to another semiconductor company—and my lastcompany—somewhat similar to Fairchild Semiconductor, not as good atscience as Fairchild Semiconductor, and this was a turn-around. This companyhad existed prior to us. It had been financed incorrectly; it had the wrongmanagement, and the investors didn’t understand the semiconductor business.And we went in acquiring this—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Investors being code for venture capitalists? Valentine: Yes, not all venture capitalists are smart; a lot of them are pretty dumb.Geography matters. This company was financed by venture capitalists in theEast, and the company was in Connecticut. I don’t know much aboutConnecticut, and I have no prejudices against Connecticut, but there isnothing happening there. In the immortal words of Gertrude Stein, there’s nothere there. Here is where you do semiconductor companies, there is whereyou make nutmeg or something different. So we basically took over thecompany and restarted it using local Silicon Valley people.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, do we have a principle right there in that example? It sounds to me asthough your Connecticut people are acting like an investment banker or aWhitney or a Rockefeller. They have a lot of money; they want to make more.But they’re not interested in building companies, particularly, so they just putmoney in, and they’re sitting in Connecticut hoping it works out, yes? Valentine: Yes, I think that’s a very good summary. One of the strengths that I’vepersonally had, and Sequoia has had, is the benefit of being in the center ofthe universe at the right time. And the center of the universe was here and notin Connecticut. And one of the principles that we followed at Sequoia sinceforever, is that we only invested in Silicon Valley; we only invest in the WestCoast. We made very few investments in San Diego. We’ve made noinvestments in Seattle for the first thirty years. It wasn’t that there were badcompanies there; it’s we had more than we needed here.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right. Valentine: And since we’re very hands-on in our investing, we needed access. Manyother people in the venture business invest everywhere. It doesn’t matter tothem. I don’t know how they do that; I wish them well. If I find a goodinvestment in Lexington, Kentucky, I’ll call someone and tell them. “It’s allyours.” I don’t know where Lexington is, and I don’t want to learn.So, National [Semiconductor] experience was the end of my education. I hadlearned, in my opinion, all there was to learn at Fairchild, in a startup, and I’dlearned all I had to learn at National in a turn-around. I’d always run sales andmarketing in these companies, so I became fairly proficient at sales andmarketing in the creation of different solutions, which were unique at the timebut highly advantageous to the specific companies.All of those experiences made it comfortable for me, when I was approached,to join an effort to raise money and finance startups. If you just take 1970,because it’s an easy year, there were very, very, very few dedicated funds forventure capital in the country. It didn’t matter where they were. I think thatwhen we raised money by accident—Tom Perkins was raising money at thesame time—there was probably less than $50 million dedicated to thiscategory of investing in the whole country. So it was a very embryonicbusiness, very, very few practitioners, and money was hard to raise.[interruption][End Audio File 3]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I’ve lost track of where we are, to tell you the truth. Valentine: We have gotten through to the beginning of Sequoia.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All right. Valentine: So in the early seventies, in the first round of raising money, and it was veryeasy to decide where and what to invest in. Initially, it was difficult to raisemoney because the money was all controlled by the East, and they had noexperience, really, in taking the money from different endowments or pensionfunds and putting it in these kinds of illiquid investments. So we came up witha sufficiently attractive platform that was successful in getting investorsinterested.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: This is the first fund? Valentine: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How much did you raise? Valentine: Five million dollars. And we were going to invest in technology companies,only on the West Coast, that were addressing big markets. We were interestedin building major companies; we were not interested in being in theinvestment business, which is different than building companies. We wantedthe money to come from tax-exempt sources, so we decided never to haveindividuals.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now explain the thinking behind the tax-exempt sources. Valentine: Well, most of the money in North America is tax-exempt money. It’s youruniversity or it’s a foundation or it’s a pension fund. So in going after taxexempt money, you’re going after the majority of the money. They just havesome sensitivity about how it’s invested, so that their position as being taxexempt is not at all ever threatened. So we were going at what we presumedwould be the largest sources.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. Valentine: Having hammered out the concepts that we were going to follow—and one ofwhich was geographically limited. We didn’t think we had to go to Texas; wedidn’t think we had to go to North Carolina. We thought there’d be enoughinvestable opportunities here that we could get returns that would be veryattractive to them. So the large pools of tax-exempt money were happyreturning 10 percent a year. And what we thought we could do was more thantwice that. We thought we could deliver 20 to 25 percent compoundedannually.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now what gave you that confidence? Valentine: In a word? Naïveté. The investments that I had made personally achieved thateasily. I was interested in finding a standard which they, first of all,recognized. So 8 to 10 percent was a terrific standard. In your endowmentworld, the universities normally are limited to taking 5 percent of theendowment annually to run the institution. So they had this goal of 10 percentcovering their annual 5 percent need. I just made a value judgment that said ifwe deliver twice their objective, we will have long-term lots and lots ofinterested people or entities willing to have us finance startups using theirmoney.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now, were you going to institutions with which you had a previousconnection? Valentine: No.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why? Valentine: Because there were no institutions that I had previous connections with. Thenature of Fairchild Semiconductor’s customers were divisions of giantaerospace companies. And we never did business at the level of the presidentor the chairman. So it was, initially, without those contacts.I have to tell one story because I’ve always enjoyed it. I went to see somepeople in New York—that’s where the money was—who were at a companyby the name of Salomon Brothers. And I went there largely because a friendof mine was very convinced—Berkeley graduate—that I could do what I saidand that Salomon Brothers should be an investor. This is the investment worldof New York, Manhattan. All of my prejudices, I’m sure, were blinking likelights in their face. And we went through a little pitch, and we got to thequestions. This one guy—he had all of the documents in front of him—hesaid, “You didn’t go to Harvard Business School.” And I said, “Right. I didn’tgo to Harvard Business School. I went to Fairchild Semiconductor businessschool.” [<|endoftext|>
Interviewer laughs] He had no sense of humor, didn’t find that at allfunny, and said, “We’re not going to invest with anybody who didn’t go toHarvard Business School.”I said, “You could’ve saved me a lot of time, because there’s no way I’mgoing to tell you I went to Harvard Business School, because I haven’t and,parenthetically, never have had any interest.” I said, “You know, I’m fromanother part of the country, which I think to you is like a different planet.”And that was the end of the conversation with Salomon Brothers.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I can imagine that it was! Valentine: There’s a lot of preconception in the investment community. This was after Iexplained to them I’m not in the investment business; I’m in the business ofstarting great companies. He was not able to make a distinction outside hisboundary prejudices.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I think it was off-tape that you told me last time with some pride that nobodyat Sequoia—maybe you qualified it a little—had a Harvard business degree oran MBA, period. Is that more or less correct? Valentine: That is more or less correct historically. We began with the opinion that wewanted to have people who knew how to start and run businesses. There wasnothing to be learned at any business school in learning how accountingworked and things like that. Those were things that you hire people to do. Youdon’t hire people to start and run the company; you hire people to doaccounting. All people, initially, were like me. No one went to businessschool. Many of us went to the Fairchild Semiconductor business school orsome other technology school. And I suspect that we do have MBAs aroundhere. It’s the second greatest crime; the first greatest crime is a lawyer. Wedon’t have any of those around here, because I’d have them nailed up in thelobby.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] You realize that Caroline [who is filming] is married to a lawyer. Valentine: Yes, I just discovered that, based on her response.Crawford: He’s a good lawyer!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] Exactly what I was going to say. He’s an environmental lawyer. Valentine: Yes, well, not knowing your husband, my next observation obviously isn’tpersonal. But there was once a president in this country, back in the earlydays, who said, “The only good Indian is a dead Indian.” Well, just change theIndian to—Crawford: Got your metaphor. Valentine: So.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, may I ask you something about not having a business degree? I agree,and it seems reasonable that you would hire accountants, et cetera,presumably one has to anyway. Isn’t part of the due diligence that youpresumably value, doesn’t that mean going over the financials? Valentine: No.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: No? So why not? Valentine: [sigh] Well, let me make a point of clarification. Most of the time we invest incompanies that have no sales. So there are no financials.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right. Valentine: So going over them—it’s a matter of looking at a fantasy that the entrepreneuris trying to persuade you is the future. And it’s done by a computer, so thenumbers all foot. There aren’t any math errors. So what you do is you listen tothe man’s vision of what the future is going to be, knowing after making acouple hundred investments that he’s very optimistic or he wouldn’t bestarting a business. So no, we don’t spend any time looking at the financialsbecause we know they’re wrong. We don’t need somebody who’s an expert atthat since we don’t look at them. Now we look at the financials from a coupleof points of view, one of which is: what’s the gross margin of the product?Very critical. What is the burn rate on cash? So there are things that we lookat that are forecasts of what’s going to happen.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You mean burn rate that is occurring or will occur? Valentine: Will occur. See everything—everything is the future.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How do you calculate that? Valentine: Numbers. All of the costs in a startup are people, right? So we start a companyand we need nine engineers. So we hire nine engineers.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, you need a place to put them. Valentine: Yes, and we know what that costs. And they need some laptops, and we knowwhat that costs. If you do it long enough, you just double the cost of the nineengineers, and you’re close enough to what the burn rate will be. The issue islistening to their answer, and if it’s less than two times the engineers [cost],we know maybe they’re a little aggressive with their numbers. If it’s muchmore than two times the engineers, well, maybe they’re not so good atmanaging costs. But we don’t need anybody to do that for us. We’ve done thatin running companies. So what we have when we start with the format ofpeople’s backgrounds that we have chosen is, we have people who know howto run businesses. They’ve run businesses. Let me just ask you a question. I’mtrying to remember who else you’re interviewing. Pitch?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. Valentine: Tom [Perkins]?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. Valentine: Reid [Dennis]?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. Bill Edwards. Valentine: Three Harvard Business School graduates.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] There are a lot more of them. Valentine: Yes, so I don’t want to leave you with the impression that my prejudice isanything more than a prejudice. Are you doing Arthur [Rock?]?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, I’ve interviewed him. Valentine: Arthur graduated from Harvard. So you have a predominant number of peoplethat you shared with me that are Harvard graduates, Harvard Business Schoolgraduates. So you can conclude a couple of things. One is that it’s not ahandicap. Graduating from Harvard Business School is not a negative. It maynot be a positive either, but it’s not a negative, because all of those guys aresuccessful. Is Bill Bowes on your list?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. Valentine: So you have a ton of Harvard Business School guys and varying degrees ofsuccess. Unless there are people on your list I don’t know about, I’m ananomaly.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, you are. Valentine: And I’m not from Harvard Business School, so it shows the business is suchthat it can be done by a lot of different people with different backgrounds,including fundamentally different educations. That’s my plug for HarvardBusiness School.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: The way you got to venture capital is very different from the way TomPerkins—well, he isn’t a good example because he did come up throughtechnology. Valentine: Yes, Tom is more similar to me than dissimilar. All the other guys are verydissimilar.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You spent some time today explaining the prelude to Don Valentine asventure capitalist. It looks to me as though there are many ways of doing this.A lot of it boils down to the native and acquired abilities of the individual. Valentine: I agree. See, venture capital is very reducible to a few words. You have to beinterested in managing change, and you have to recognize that change isnecessary.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That’s an interesting idea that nobody else has talked to me about. So what areyou thinking about when you say managing change? What change? Whatchanges—I imagine there are many. Valentine: Today’s solution is wrong for tomorrow.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You mean technology.60 Valentine: Yes, but it’s applicable to a lot of other things. It’s just that it’s harder tounderstand because [other] things don’t change fast enough. Technologychanges rapidly, so you’re able to see it very quickly. The evolution ofhandheld computers has happened in three years, and you have unbelievablygood products right now that were not conceivable four years ago. Peoplenever would have agreed that you’d have something like the iPhone.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: When you talk about managing change, in this case managing technology, areyou meaning within the company? The company can’t just make a goodproduct and sit back. You, the board, whomever, has to be always severaljumps ahead, I’m imagining, in order to anticipate how technology ischanging or perhaps should be stimulated in this company to change. TheiPhone is here. What’s next? Who does that? Valentine: People that I find, people that are immigrants, people that are just in schoolnow. Let me work at answering your question from an angle. Ten years ago,there was a product on the market, only one of its kind. They had basically100 percent market share. Anybody who wanted to listen to music while theywere moving had a Walkman. Did you ever have a Walkman?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All my kids did. Valentine: You ever have a Walkman? [Directed to Caroline Crawford.] Right. So youhad a cassette, and it was all there was, so it was spectacular. And Sonyowned the market. There were no competitors of any consequence in theworld. The technology was fairly simple. The biggest part of their success wastheir distribution system. But just as recently as three-and-a-half or four yearsago, a local company by the name of Apple eliminated the Walkman foreverwith a radically different product. So you didn’t have one song—you have athousand songs.That’s what I mean about embracing change. You have to recognize that whatyou have is not the end; it’s not the limit. When you can’t do that change fromthe Walkman to the iPod, you become like General Motors. You cannotdevelop anything new. General Motors, in a very short period of time, losttheir role to a Japanese company by the name of Toyota, who did embracechange.[Paragraph Mr. Valentine added during editing]:Change happens everywhere—only the rate of change differs. The basicenergy creating and recognizing change comes from the entrepreneursexploiting base technology. We financed a shoe company—no technology atall. It was just acquired for $1B. The company’s business is selling mostlywomen’s shoes over the internet, no stores—Zappos.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: In many cases you are sitting on the board, right? Valentine: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What do you do to stimulate a company if you aren’t satisfied with where itis? Valentine: It’s a matter of starting with the conviction that that’s the right course ofaction. I don’t know what the position is of the dozen people you’reinterviewing, but it wouldn’t surprise me if a small number of them would notwholeheartedly agree with just randomly embracing change, deciding that thepast was wrong for the future. And that’s why companies lost momentum.Think about why it’s very difficult in this country to have a company with $50billion in sales. They die before they get to $50 billion in sales. They don’thave any new products.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why? Valentine: Risk.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: One measure of success is the growth of the company, right? Valentine: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But the downside of that is the bigger you get, the tendency is to build ininertia. What really happens to companies after they’ve gotten off the groundand have enlarged? Why can’t they keep that earlier culture? Valentine: You know, I have an answer that I’ve developed largely because it’s a funanswer. I’m not sure I know the real answer. But to me, the most dangerousthing that happens in a company when it starts and it’s going along well: youstart an HR [human resources] department, and the people in the HRdepartment want to level the playing field. I mean, they are communist atheart. They basically want everybody to have the same medical program,everybody to have the same parking place, everybody has the same, same,same, same, same, same, same. Their purpose there—and they’re not aware ofthis— They have binders [of policies] and you suddenly are regimented as acompany into categories of people. They’re not interested in change—they’reinterested in sameness. So they legislate by accident, not hiring people whoare strange and want to make change. They want obedient people. And withobedience you get no innovation, because it’s disobedience that gets you theinnovation—someone who doesn’t believe what’s going on is the limit.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you say this sort of thing in board meetings? Valentine: Fearlessly.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And how do people react? Valentine: Stunned. Because you’re attacking one of the cows that has become, or is inthe process of becoming, sacred. All companies are told—God, you’ve got tohave this HR policy and all this great stuff so your employees will love you. Idon’t want them to love me. I want them to work their asses off coming upwith new products. [<|endoftext|>
Interviewer chuckles] So there are things that unintentionallytake all of the momentum out of the company. And the company’s agendabecomes defocused. So they’re not interested in knocking Sony out of thatWalkman socket. They have other agenda, whatever they are, wellintentioned, perfectly good agenda, good for the country, good for the state,but it ain’t good for the company.Historically we [in venture capital] have always been the effort to changethings. And that’s how you build great companies. You have to do thingsdifferently. Why does the automotive industry fail? And the simplistic reasonseems to be the labor unions. Sounds good to me. All I know is they’ve failedas an industry to innovate. And I’m very inclined toward a conspiracy theorythat was started way back when between the first car manufacturer and thefirst petroleum supplier. The internal combustion engine was designed tomake the world work for those two companies, and it did. And it’s wonderful,except we forgot: how do we keep going?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: May I ask you a question? Valentine: I’m done.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: We sort of got into it last time, but I’d like to hear it more explicitly. I believeyou said something to the effect that some of your colleagues in venturecapital, and successful ones, put a lot of credence in the person, in theentrepreneur. And you said something to the effect that that’s not the way yougo about it; that you look at market. Would you expand on that? And wheredoes the person come in? Valentine: Well, just to frame the question the way it normally is: for years, largely forentertainment purposes, debates were staged, in significant part, with ArthurRock and myself. Arthur Rock is the representative of, you find a greatentrepreneur and you back him. And my position has always been, you find agreat market and you build multiple companies in that market. How are theydifferent? Obviously I have to have, in my companies, the same kinds offunctions that Arthur has. So I need to have a president, and I need to have asales manager, and I need to have a head of engineering. I think the differenceis that my articulated position recognizes that choosing great people is very,very hard. All these people who come with great credentials—and I’ll talkabout one at the end of the story—and often don’t work out. So presidents inSilicon Valley are changed 50 percent of the time, five-O, 50 percent of thetime.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Wow. Valentine: And that’s by people who start with great people. I start with whomever, andstatistically we’ll replace our presidents less than 50 percent of the time. Butwhat I want is a big market. The expression of a big market is some kind of aproblem which when it’s solved provides you with a very special opportunityto have massive levels of sales in that solution. [pause] [sigh] I have to thinkabout this for a minute—because this is for posterity.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] Be careful. Valentine: Right. I think his name is [G.] Richard Wagoner, the currently deposed chiefexecutive of General Motors, was in the community within the last severalweeks, traveling around Silicon Valley. I was asked if I wanted to see him,and I said, “No, I have no interest in seeing him. Why is he here?” I asked.“Well, he’s getting acquainted with Silicon Valley, and he wants to see ifthere are any companies or industries that possibly he could help.” And Ithought to myself: based on what goddamn experience is he going to helpthem? [<|endoftext|>
Interviewer laughs] I mean he put General Motors out of business!Anyhow.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you did not go. Valentine: Why? I’m not an autograph collector. So our view has always, preferably,been give us a technical problem, give us a big market when that technicalproblem is solved so we can sell lots and lots and lots of stuff. Do I like to dothat with terrific people? Sure. Are we unwilling to invest in companies thatdon’t have them? Sure. We invested in Apple when Steve Jobs was abouteighteen or nineteen years old— not only didn’t he go to Harvard BusinessSchool, he didn’t go to any school.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] He went to Reed for one year. Valentine: It’s not relevant. He knew the future of a business that is gigantic. And youcan say, retrospectively—well, lots of people knew about the personalcomputer. That’s a bunch of baloney! The product of choice, when Steve wasnineteen, cost $250,000 and probably a master’s degree in IT [informationtechnology] to operate it!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] I can believe; I can believe. Well, so here’s your marketingbackground coming in again, right? Your marketing background, being able toassess where the need is going to be and how big the market’s going to be,right? Valentine: Yes. But why would I want to do that? See? And the answer in marketing isdata. So you can get independent data and analyze it and slice it and dice it ina lot of different ways and come to any number of conclusions. When you’rehiring someone or interviewing someone, it’s totally your instinct to deal withthe answers he provides that live up to his credentials. A lot of people, I’mtold, would be delighted to have Mr. Wagoner on their board or something.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But that’s surely just name recognition, isn’t it? Valentine: I have no idea. See, I would never do it. There’s no amount of money hewould have to pay the company to be on one of our boards. So the nuancesthat surround this easy articulation of a distinction are more important than theobvious gross distinction. I love doing business with bright, smart people. Iwouldn’t go out of my way to not go into business with them. But if themanagement is a wreck, it’s called Cisco [Systems], because when weinvested in Cisco we were the only people that would invest in Cisco.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because of the management? Valentine: Because of the management. They were difficult; they knew nothing, but theyhad a solution to a giant problem. So as I’ve said before, I would do businesswith the devil, and Cisco was an opportunity because they had a fabuloussolution to a gigantic problem.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And did it continue to be difficult to deal with them? Valentine: No, we got rid of them.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] That’s one solution! Valentine: We replaced them.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, how quickly? Valentine: Not very quickly. The arrangement we made is that we would give them anamount of money: they would have one-third of the company; we would haveone-third of the company; and the future employees would have one-third ofthe company. And the future employees would include new executivemanagement, and we would supply the people to fill those slots. That was theunderstanding. So over time, we got a new president.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I think you would agree that you’re a strong personality? Valentine: After so many years of listening to other people tell me that, I got themessage. I thought at first I knew only all the timid people in the world.[<|endoftext|>
Interviewer chuckles]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Despite the fact that you’ve told me that it’s not just about people, you stillhave to deal with people both within Sequoia and in your dealing with yourlimited partners, et cetera. Where do the social graces come in, if at all? Justplain being able to get along with people and have them do what you wantthem to do? So where is personality in this mix? Valentine: I’m thinking about my sort of customary answer to a question like that. Letme say that I almost never have trouble with smart people. I have a lot oftrouble with dumb people, and that’s a patience issue. So there are things thatI do not engage in, aspects of the business that I don’t engage in, because ofthat patience problem. So if I know there are people that don’t get it, I justavoid counseling with them.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] I can imagine. So it hasn’t been a stumbling block— Valentine: No, it’s any—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I’m thinking of you in a meeting. Don Valentine can’t always knoweverything. So have you been able to bring other people— Well, you musthave been able to bring other people into the picture and reach some kind ofconsensus. Valentine: Yes. Two things are working there. The recognition of the problem is veryeasy. Providing an environment for the other people to participate in makinginvestment decisions is my job. So the first thing that you do is you hirepeople who are very opinionated and very personally confident so they canarticulate their opinion to everybody around the table. They have enoughachievement and skill that the people around the table enjoy what they have tosay and put weight behind it. The second thing is just simply extremelytactical. I never speak first.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is that so? Valentine: I always speak last.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because you want to know what’s out there? Valentine: I want to know what’s out there, and I don’t want them to know what myposition is.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And while you’re listening, does your position tend to change? Valentine: It may very well be moderated by other people’s inputs. But once yourecognize the problem, it’s easy to mechanize around it. But no, I don’t wantto have people in Sequoia who don’t have the confidence to have strongpersonal opinions public, because we need that. I want as far away fromhomogeneity as I can get. I would much rather have people that are vastlydifferent, as different as you can get them. We have people here that are notU.S.-born. A lot of the core people around here are born outside the U.S. Sofrom my point of view, you go to the end of the earth to get strong opinions.Because you see, every time we make an investment, there are fifty-tworeasons to do it and forty-eight reasons not to do it. It’s never seventy-thirty.So you really need people that are willing to pound the table with theirposition, and you need to provide the environment in which they can do that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is every investment based on the group’s consensus? Valentine: Yes. Some of the people that you’re interviewing use what I refer to as thestar system. The star system is a telephone architecture where all of the handphones go into a central place to be routed somewhere else. I don’t like thatsystem, and we’ve never used that system. What it does is, it prevents peoplefrom emerging, having their own persona and their own confidence. So I don’tlike that system. We don’t use that system.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, you’ve done a thorough job, I think. Are there gaping holes that weshould cover before we wind up? Valentine: I don’t know. I can answer that better if you show me something that I canread. I don’t know how historians operate.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] Casually. You will be getting transcripts to review. Valentine: I’ve got to get rolling. Thank you.
Interviewer: —you were born in Rochester, New York and that you came from a familywho owned a candy store .Rack: Correct. Right over there [pointing to a map? pointing to a photograph?].<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh really. I’ll have to take a look afterwards .Rack: Okay.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I know you worked in the candy store—did that give you any ideas aboutwhat you might want to do in your future life .Rack: Well, it gave me an idea that I wanted to do something commercially. I don’tthink I had any idea of venture capital. [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. Well, there wasn’t even the term at that point .Rack: Well, that’s right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Tell me a little bit about your parents .Rack: My father was an immigrant from Russia, and my grandparents on mymother’s side were immigrants from Poland.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And came straight to New York .Rack: As far as I know. To Rochester.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. I was meaning New York State. So your father spoke with an accent .Rack: He did.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was Russian spoken in the home? .Rack: My parents didn’t—well, it would have been Yiddish if they had spokentogether, because Russian and Polish aren’t exactly the same. But I think theymade an extended effort to speak English.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Sort of the immigrant idea of adapting to the new culture .Rack: Absolutely.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you think being—well, I don’t what to call you—I guess it was the firstgeneration, except for your mother, American. Do you feel that made anydifference in how you looked at life .Rack: Oh I’m sure. It had to.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Can you articulate how it might have .Rack: Well, if you’re familiar at all with immigrant parents—all they were interestedin was the success of their children, and there was never a question that Iwouldn’t go to college or that I wouldn’t be a success. That was absolutelytheir motive in life.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. And what kind of a household was it? Was it a .Rack: A very poor household.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yeah, a very poor household. And a very disciplined household? How wereyou brought up .Rack: I wouldn’t say disciplined. I had to work during my entire young life.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And you had to work because it was necessary .Rack: Somebody had to be in the store, yeah.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see—and so that was just a given .Rack: That was all given, and then I worked other places. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Such as .Rack: Well, when I was very, very young, I sold Liberty and Saturday Evening Postmagazines from door to door.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh really! [chuckling .Rack: Then I worked in other—as a summer clerk in other confectionery stores, drugstores.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were your peers doing similar things .Rack: Oh I think they had a much easier life.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You were going to public high schools and public grammar schools all theway through .Rack: Correct.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And did you have a bent in any particular direction in terms of education .Rack: No, I don’t think so. I just took courses which would allow me to entercollege.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So that was really the thing .Rack: And I was not a good student, at all.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Really .Rack: No. Very poor. I can remember my eighth grade teacher saying that I’d bettertake commercial courses in high school instead of academic courses.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How do you account for your poor showing? Certainly not lack of brainpower .Rack: Well, maybe so. I don’t know! <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [laughing] I somehow doubt that .Rack: I think I was kind of rebellious.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you .Rack: I just did not do well in school.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And I would gather from that that you didn’t particularly enjoy it .Rack: I did not enjoy it; I did not enjoy school.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did the after-school jobs, then, become kind of a release? That that’s whereyou put your energy .Rack: No. I don’t think it was a release. It was just something I did.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. Do you have brothers and sisters .Rack: I had a sister who passed away very early, and I do have a brother who istwelve years younger than I am and we’re quite distant.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You mean geographically or emotionally? [chuckling .Rack: Both. And agewise.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Both and agewise and everything you can think of. All right, so no particulardirection in terms of your future career as far as your early education .Rack: No.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: No. You just thought eventually it was going to be business of some sort .Rack: Of some sort, correct. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Then why Syracuse University? Did you have anything else in mind otherthan .Rack: Well, I went in the army for a year.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh you did .Rack: Yeah, I entered the army a year before the war was over and—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you drafted .Rack: I would have been drafted if I didn’t volunteer. Yeah, I was eighteen yearsold. I went to Syracuse because they accepted me. A couple of other schoolsdidn’t.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is that so. [chuckling .Rack: And also—I don’t think I could have gone to school if it hadn’t been for theG.I. Bill.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is that so? You just didn’t have the money .Rack: Yeah, correct.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That was quite a bill, wasn’t it? There were a lot of people .Rack: It was fantastic, fantastic.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Going back just a notch to your military service; were you sent abroad .Rack: No. War was over before I—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. Did that experience .Rack: I hated the army! The army and I agreed not to get along. [laughter] <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was it the regimentation .Rack: Yes, of course. And having to report to people who I felt were not too bright.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, so you got out of there as soon as you could .Rack: I did indeed.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What happened at Syracuse other than more study .Rack: Well, I did not do too well at Syracuse. I did better as the years went on. I gotinterested in politics at Syracuse, in the political scheme at Syracuse—studentpolitics is what I meant to say.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh really. And enough to run for an office .Rack: Well, I was asked to run, to be president of the student council, and I electednot to. I don’t know quite why I did that. But I was quite active. I also wasasked to join the student honor society, which I did.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did that carry on after you graduated .Rack: My interest in politics?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes .Rack: Yeah, it carried on when I moved to New York after Harvard. I became ayoung Republican, and as a matter of fact, I ran John Lindsay’s firstcampaign, his primary campaign for Congress. That was in 19—must havebeen 1960 or ’59, somewhere—’59 to ’61, somewhere in there.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: At one stage did you have political ambitions .Rack: No, I decided pretty quick that that wasn’t the life for me.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: From—what was the— .Rack: Oh just what I observed and saw, and what it’s necessary to do to be apolitician.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Mainly talk very smoothly and fast .Rack: Well, yeah, but the give and take of it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: The compromise .Rack: Exactly, the compromise.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So do I conclude from that that you’re not a great compromiser .Rack: Absolutely not. [<|endoftext|>
Interviewer laughs] No. I have very strong opinions on almosteverything. [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So it’s Arthur .Rack’s way or no way .Rack: Or the highway!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yeah, or the highway! What did you major in at Syracuse .Rack: I got a degree in business and in, I think, in political science.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All right. Your two interests .Rack: That’s correct. Political science was a minor, as I recall now.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was there much of a social life .Rack: Well, through the political—I joined a fraternity, and through the political lifeI had a decent social life.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So it wasn’t all work .Rack: I didn’t do much work. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] All right. And then Harvard Business School came right afterthat .Rack: Well, I worked for a year between schools, in New York, as an accountant.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: For whom .Rack: For the Vick Chemical Company.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh—that makes the lozenges .Rack: Vicks VapoRub. Right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh yeah, right. Do I ever remember that well as a child! [laughter .Rack: Yeah, that company. It was a fairly large company at the time, but they soldout to somebody or other. I can’t remember.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you ever think that maybe accounting would be what you would do .Rack: I thought that at one time. I wasn’t sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But do you like that kind of precision .Rack: No, no. I didn’t. It’s too confined.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And so did that job teach you that .Rack: Pardon me?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That job taught you that? I mean, you came to that conclusion during thatyear .Rack: No, during that era. But I knew when I went into it that I wanted to go tograduate school. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And you must not have done so poorly at Syracuse if you got into HarvardBusiness School .Rack: Well, you can say that, but what really got me in was I made friends with thedean of the business school at Syracuse, and he was formally on the faculty atHarvard, and he recommended me to Harvard.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see .Rack: So I don’t know if I would have gotten in without that recommendation or not,but in any event—there I was.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How had you met him .Rack: Oh he was dean—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh he was dean .Rack: At Syracuse.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: At Syracuse. I see, I see. And he must have seen something in you .Rack: Well, I think he may have, yeah.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What could he have seen at that stage .Rack: I don’t [know] [chuckling].<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Ambition .Rack: Probably, probably—probably.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, tell me how it was to arrive at Harvard Business School. This must havebeen an experience for somebody coming from your background. .Rack: Oh it’s quite an experience. First of all, Harvard was a name that is just ineverybody’s mind as being the top place to go. I never thought I’d go toHarvard.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yeah, no I bet. Was that intimidating in any way .Rack: Oh of course! Of course it was intimidating, and then to meet all thesestudents, mostly who came from Ivy League schools, that came from veryprivileged backgrounds. This was quite an experience for me.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you ever feel that you were getting the short end of the stick because ofwhere you came from .Rack: At Harvard?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: At Harvard Business School .Rack: No, no.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: No, no. So none of that .Rack: It was pretty egalitarian.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: They looked at what you were and what you could do .Rack: That’s exactly right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And what to say about your classes .Rack: Oh I enjoyed them a lot.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you .Rack: Yeah, I got a little better than average grades. Not great grades.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you learn things that were going to prove to be very helpful later on? .Rack: Well, the main thing I learned was what’s possible. I had no idea that the kindof things that they were teaching, and the people—I could reach that kind oflevel. I knew nothing about that life. And that’s the main thing I got out ofHarvard, I think.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Explain that a little bit more—what kind of avenues did it open up in yourmind .Rack: Well, just that there was another life! There’s Wall Street and stocks andbonds and being CEO of a company. This was something I really hadn’texperienced or thought of, or had no way of knowing about. And the casemethod, of course, did a lot towards that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Really—Harvard is known for that, right .Rack: Yes. I got a lot out of the discussions, and probably learned more in discussingthe case outside of the classroom than I did in the classroom. Just theinteraction with other students.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Had any of those students actually been out in the business world, or were youall pretty much on the same .Rack: Harvard has a policy of requiring that most of the students, unless there’ssome other reason, be in the business world for at least a year or two andsometimes longer. I think it’s getting longer now.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So that when you were having these conversations outside the classroom,people, to a degree anyway, were speaking from their own experience? Orwhat was it .Rack: No, I don’t think so. I think it was just the interaction.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You liked the mix of ideas .Rack: Oh yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What about thinking about your own career? Where were you in that process? .Rack: Well, the further I went along, the more I was convinced I wanted to go toWall Street.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And why was that .Rack: Because I liked creating businesses and I liked the money. I was notuninterested in money.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you think that had something to do with where you came from? The factthat .Rack: Oh of course. It was a discussion all the time, about how were we going to putbread on the table, so to speak.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yeah, yeah—so obviously money is a means to get somewhere .Rack: To get, yeah—obviously.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you at all unusual in that? Or were people frank about—part of mymotivation .Rack: Oh! That’s the reason we were there!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, but people don’t necessarily admit that .Rack: Oh I understand that!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yeah, but you think that definitely was the mo[tivation] .Rack: Sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And there must have been some prestige involved in your thinking. WallStreet, after all, is quite an address .Rack: Is part of what?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Wall Street has an aura of prestige. .Rack: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That is recognized worldwide, I would say .Rack: Oh of course, yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So in other words, it seems to me you were heading for the top right away .Rack: Oh I think that’s right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is that characteristic of you .Rack: I think so.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All right, so—is there more to say about Harvard Business School .Rack: Well, I also met some classmates who I did business with later on, and whohelped each other.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That’s a common experience .Rack: Yes, it is, of course.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That people draw upon those classmates over the years .Rack: That’s exactly right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And vice-versa. I’m sure there were plenty of them drawing on you as well![chuckling] All right. Well, tell me about your arrival at Wall Street. I got thefeeling that Hayden, Stone wasn’t the first place you worked .Rack: I worked at three places in ten years.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All right. .Rack: I was on Wall Street for ten years, from ’51 to ’61. And I went to work inWertheim and Company—it’s no longer—none of these firms that I worked atare in business anymore—at Wertheim and Company.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: No why did you go there .Rack: Because they offered me a job.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] All right. So this must have been about the mid—[fifties]? Whatwas this .Rack: 1951.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: 1951 .Rack: I graduated from Harvard and went down to Wall Street. They offered me ajob.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was the economy pretty good—the post-war economy .Rack: The economy was okay, but very few of my classmates went to Wall Street. Ithink 5 percent went to Wall Street compared to—up until this last debacle,maybe 40 percent or 30 [percent].<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Really .Rack: Well, that’s not true. More like 30 percent, I would guess.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you were very lucky .Rack: I was very lucky. I got offered a job, and then—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now why, do you think, they offered you a job .Rack: Well, they came and interviewed me, and came up to Harvard and interviewedme, and I think they—for whatever reason, they thought I would make a goodtrainee. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You have no idea .Rack: Well, I don’t think that a lot of people even interviewed. I’m not sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh really? They wrote a letter and either they got the job or they didn’t .Rack: No.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh I see .Rack: Someone from Wertheim and Company came to Harvard to interview.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. And presumably interviewed quite a number of people, right .Rack: Well, what I’m saying is that not many people went to Wall Street in thosedays. No, I think more of the graduates went either into consulting or intomanufacturing or to some big company.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. So you’re saying that it wasn’t so much that you were lucky; it wasbecause you were one of the few who chose to take that direction .Rack: I think that’s right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Okay. What did you find at Wertheim? What was your title .Rack: Associate, I guess. I enjoyed that. I got interested in running JohnLinsdsay’s—no, that was—I’m sorry. I got interested in running—I ran NewYork State Young Republicans for Eisenhower-Nixon. To say I ran it wasincorrect. I helped run it. So I quit Wertheim and went to work there for ninemonths or close to a year, and then when Eisenhower got elected I went toShields and Company, and I didn’t get along there very well.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Are these all investment banks .Rack: Yes. I say—all three of these, none of which are in existence, and I didn’t getalong too well with some of the people there, so I quit and went to Hayden,Stone. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Any why Hayden, Stone .Rack: Well, they were looking for somebody! [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So again, it was a job. It wasn’t as though you had done a lot of research onthese different companies .Rack: Well, I’d done research. I could have gone a couple of other places, but—theywere a fairly large firm and had done some things in areas I was interested in.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Give me a feeling for what you were doing .Rack: I was doing research on securities, but I was mostly interested in what thenwas the scientific companies.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Really! Why did you go in that direction .Rack: It was interesting and I thought there was an opportunity, and sure enoughthere was.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was this scientific companies everywhere in the country? Or was this pretty[much] still East Coast .Rack: Well, it was pretty much East Coast. East Coast and Midwest.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And you were interested because the science was going to go somewhere? Orwhat was it that drew you to this .Rack: Well, yes, the science was going someplace, there was a business opportunity,and I enjoyed the people who were doing that kind of thing.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Really. So the people count .Rack: Oh yes, definitely.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I should have told you right off that I’m not a business person; I’m a sciencehistorian. .Rack: Oh I know that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] So excuse my naïve questions. But were you going out as ananalyst to actually look at companies .Rack: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh you were. So that’s how you were meeting the scientists .Rack: Correct.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And then talking to the scientists or everybody, to try to figure out what thiscompany was about .Rack: What they were about, and then writing it up for stock recommendations. Itgot sent out to customers of the firm to see whether they would buy stock inthose companies that I recommended.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. This seems quite a responsibility for a youngish person. You’re beingasked to evaluate a whole company that is doing, presumably, all kinds ofdiverse science .Rack: Well, I don’t know whether it was responsibility. I don’t know that it wasresponsibility for a young person, because there were a lot of young people onWall Street doing—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Doing that kind of thing .Rack: Doing that kind of thing, not primarily in the scientific fields.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right. How did you deal with the science .Rack: How did I deal with it?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I mean, what are you talking about when you go to these companies andmeet this scientist? .Rack: Trying to figure out whether the business is going to grow, if it’s going to beprofitable, what the products are, what is their research going into, what kindof products, and I try to figure out whether they’re economically feasible andtry to evaluate the management at all times.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. Maybe it’s a little early to interject this, but I’ve seen Arthur .Rackquoted quite a few times. I can’t think of the exact quote, but how you placeemphasis on the people. Were you finding that at this early stage? That itwasn’t just a matter of market or of pro[duct]—that the people count .Rack: The people definitely counted.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, how common an orientation was that? Was that something that HarvardBusiness School was telling you to pay attention to .Rack: Well, look—I’m not a scientist, so I don’t understand all of the science they’retalking about, so I’ve got to decide on some method of [chuckling] makingevaluations, so it occurred to me that I’d do that based on people.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But you could have taken another route, it seems to me, and just look ateconomic profit, market—the people could drop out .Rack: I don’t think so. [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: No, I know you don’t, but I’m just wondering how unusual you were inputting a lot of stock in the people .Rack: Well, I may have done a little more than most did, but I—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You think it wasn’t that uncommon .Rack: Well, it was uncommon, but not greatly. [chuckling] I can’t—it’s difficult tosay. But in my later life it was uncommon.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All right. We’ll get into that, I guess, all right. I don’t know what else to askabout that particular stage. Do we want immediately to get into the letter fromEugene Kleiner? Or is there more to say before we get there? .Rack: No. I was very anxious to make my mark.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I can imagine. So the famous story about—one way or another you hear fromEugene Kleiner. Do you mind telling that story again .Rack: Oh no. I’ve told it over and over and over again, and I’m not—what I’mworried about is that I don’t tell it the same every time! [laughter] But I think Ido. Gene Kleiner’s father did business with Hayden, Stone, and when seven ofthese scientists who were at Shockley Laboratories decided they wanted toleave, and they thought maybe they’d go around looking for a jobsomeplace—Gene Kleiner said, “Well, I’ve got this friend at Hayden, Stone.Let me write to him and see if he can find us a job where we can worktogether.” So Rose Kleiner, his wife, wrote this letter to—I’ve forgotten theman’s name at Hayden, Stone, who then showed it to me, and that’s where itbegan.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now do you think he showed it to you because you were Hayden, Stone’sscience man .Rack: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So then what happened? You get the letter .Rack: I got the letter and—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And of course you didn’t know Eugene Kleiner, per se, did you .Rack: Oh not at all, not at all.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is it Fairchild yet .Rack: No, not yet.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It’s Shockley. Was Shockley Semiconductor on your radar screen .Rack: Oh I’d never heard of the man—oh that’s not true. I had heard of him, becausewe had done another deal—we had done the first deal in semiconductors at 20Hayden, Stone—General Transistor [Corporation], so I was somewhatfamiliar with the field.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Where was General Transistors? Was that a West Coast company .Rack: No, no. Long Island.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see, okay .Rack: They made germanium transistors, whereas Shockley was working on silicontransistors. So I got this letter and I looked into it a little bit and went to one ofthe partners and said, “I think we ought to go out to California and see theseguys.” So they agreed. I did go out with one of the partners and we saw theseven and decided that we’d form a company and then try and sell thecompany to one of the companies that we knew were looking to go into thatbusiness, or go into some kind of scientific—this was after the war when allthese companies said that they wanted to expand into the scientific areas, sowe—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why was that? Was that [Vannevar] Bush and the endless frontier .Rack: Yeah—also most of the businesses that companies did were only an extensionof what they did before the war. And then they got—war was over and thenthey had all these backlogs to fill and people wanted all kinds of devices—automobiles and washing machines, but they’d made those all before. Peoplejust needed them in greater quantity now. So they all said—this was commonat that time—that the companies said they wanted to go into R&D and get intomore science-based activities. So then we came back again, and by that time they had talked Bob [Robert N.]Noyce into joining them, so that now they were eight. And we did form thiscompany, and then I had the job of trying to locate someone who would investin them. There was no venture capital—that isn’t quite true—there was a littleventure capital; there was Laurance .Rackefeller and Associates and theWhitneys, but they were kind of provincial in what they were doing.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And they weren’t calling it venture capital .Rack: Oh no, no. I don’t know what they were calling it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Pitch Johnson talked about private situations. .Rack: Private placements, or something like that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Private placements .Rack: So we got up a list of some thirty or thirty-five companies who had expressedan interest in doing some of these far out things, and so I went around and sawall of them.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now are they all over the country .Rack: I either saw them or wrote to them or called them, or somehow.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now would .Rack: Primarily in the East though.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And were they thinking in terms of risk capital—what we would now callventure capital investments .Rack: Well, that was part of the problem, that they didn’t quite know what thisinvolved. [brief interruption]. So these companies, they didn’t know quitewhat they wanted to do. They were from airplane companies to batterymanufacturers, and I got turned down by all thirty-five!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right. How did—I’m trying to picture how you did this. You called up inadvance, made an appointment, and then whom did you .Rack: In some cases—normally the chairman, the CEO, the president. I don’t thinkthey had C[EOs]. CEOs was not a term in those days. It was president.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: President, yeah—but what was your pitch .Rack: Well, here’s an opportunity to do something big—a new field, new science. Iwould say at least half of them were very, very interested. But they turned usdown because they didn’t know how quite to integrate this with their culture.They thought it would be a big detriment to the people who were working intheir company if they set up a separate subsidiary whereby the founders couldmake a lot of money, which is very common today. But at least half of them said, “Gee, we like this idea. We’d love to do it. If they want to come to workfor us, that’s fine, but we’re not going to set up a separate company.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So the culture was against it .Rack: Oh yes, definitely, definitely.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And that was across the board .Rack: Absolutely.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was it just too heavy an investment to think of a bunch of private individualsto invest .Rack: There was no mechanism to do that then.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you getting discouraged .Rack: Well, I was getting discouraged until we ran into Sherman Fairchild.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] And how did that connection evolve .Rack: Well, someone at Hayden, Stone knew Sherman [M.] Fairchild and introducedme to him. Sherman Fairchild was a most interesting man, very interested inall kinds of things, and he had invented the aerial camera, which was used inthe war. Then they found that they couldn’t fit the camera into any of theairplanes, so that company then became Fairchild Camera and Instrument. Itmade the camera, and then they couldn’t fit this camera into airplanes. I guessthe airplane manufacturers were unwilling to redesign their airplanes toaccommodate the camera, so he then invented an airplane. And thatcompany—yeah, that was called Fairchild Airplane Company. And he had allkinds of interests. He was just very—I guess the word’s eclectic.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What was he by training .Rack: Well, Sherman Fairchild’s father was the original backer of Tom Watson informing IBM, and they were equal partners, although Fairchild didn’t havemuch to do with the operations of the company. He was just a financialbacker. Well, it turns out that Tom Watson had, I think, seven children, and Sherman Fairchild was an only son. So Sherman Fairchild, after Tom Watsondied and Sherman Fairchild’s father died, Sherman Fairchild then was thebiggest owner of IBM stock. So that’s where his money came from.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yeah, that would do it .Rack: So he could do anything he wanted. He was a very wealthy man.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But as you well know; you don’t need me to say this, it’s not just having a lotof money, it’s having .Rack: No, it’s brains!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It’s having the imagination or the .Rack: Oh—well, this man had incredible imagination. So he liked the idea, and heliked the guys. We introduced—they all came East and met him, and he likedthem. And then he told Fairchild Camera and Instrument that they were goingto do this. I guess he was chairman of the board of Fairchild Camera andInstrument; I’m not sure. But he had enough clout there that he just told themthey were going to do this.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you think—in the way you’re telling it—I definitely get the strongmessage that if it hadn’t been for Sherman Fairchild, the company wouldn’thave done it .Rack: I think that the entire semiconductor industry—let me put it another way:Silicon Valley would not have been called Silicon Valley.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Really .Rack: I don’t think so. I think these seven guys, eight guys, would have gone off—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because they would have had to split up .Rack: They would either split up or maybe they would have gone to TexasInstruments, who was starting in the same field. I don’t know that. I mean,nobody knows that, but they would have split up, probably, and they— <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That’s an interesting thought, isn’t it—how many things would have beenvery different. [chuckling .Rack: Oh yeah.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, and you have to take some credit for that .Rack: Well, I hope so!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I know. So these eight people, who appeared before Sherman Fairchild—whatwere they like as individuals? Were they very helpful in what you wereafter—namely, getting some money to get the venture off the ground .Rack: Well, they knew what they had to do.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Which was sell the idea .Rack: Yeah, yeah.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And they were good at that, because I’m just thinking—these people have justemerged from laboratories .Rack: They were purely academic. They had just gotten their PhDs and had been atShockley for maybe a year.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that all .Rack: I think so. I’m not sure. I can’t remember.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, whatever—not very long .Rack: Not very long in any event.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So Shockley must have turned them off pretty quickly then .Rack: Oh he was a very difficult man. Extremely difficult. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Maybe it’s fortunate for all of us that he was .Rack: I’d like to think so. [chuckling] Certainly for me!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I’m trying to visualize Sherman Fairchild in his president’s office, orwherever he was—and you troop in with these eight guys. Do they knowenough even to dress up to East Coast standards .Rack: Probably. I don’t think so.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: No. But maybe that was good. Maybe they looked like scientists .Rack: Well, they did look like scientists. [chuckling] They did look like scientists.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is that meeting fresh in your mind .Rack: No, that meeting is not. But anyway, it worked out, and so we formed thiscompany. So then we actually formed the company, and it was calledmillion, for which they got an option to buy all of the stock that the eight heldplus Hayden, Stone for $3 million. That was a lot of money in those days.That stock was divided—each one of the eight got 10 percent of the stock, andHayden, Stone got 20 [percent].<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Who set up that division .Rack: Probably I did.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because that becomes somewhat of a model, does it not .Rack: Oh that’s now the 80/20 deal that all private companies are doing.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yeah—do you remember that being somewhat arbitrary? How did you getto .Rack: Well, it just seemed so simple. Here are these eight guys. [laughter] <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: If there had been six it would have been a different ratio .Rack: It would have been a different ratio. I thought 20 percent was about right forHayden, Stone.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now were these sophisticated people in terms of equity ownership .Rack: No, not at all.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you were the ones that said, “You need to have 10 percent of this deal. .Rack: Right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because I’m imaging that what they were more interested in was: We need aplace to work and we want to work together .Rack: That’s exactly right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So then what? What about a place; what about a facility .Rack: Well, they now had $1.5 million and they went out and rented or bought—Ithink they rented a small facility and furnished it, and got all the labequipment they needed—and it turned out transistors after a while.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yeah, was Shockley mad as Hades .Rack: Oh he wouldn’t talk to any of the eight of them ever.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yeah, I bet .Rack: He called them the Treacherous Eight. I think that phrase is pretty wellknown.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you ever have any of that tarring by the same brush .Rack: Well, I don’t know. I never met the man, so I don’t know whether he includedme. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I doubt you were on his favorite list .Rack: Well, I don’t even know that he knew that I existed.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, that could be. And then you went on the board, right .Rack: No, I did not.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You did not go on the board! Why .Rack: Because Hayden, Stone felt that one of their partners ought to go on the board,being an elder statesman, so to speak.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh—did that irritate you .Rack: Not particularly.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did that more or less cut off your tie with the .Rack: No, not at all. I became very friendly with all of them, some more than others,obviously. Oh no, then I started coming out to California, to not only see whatwas going on there, but I got interested in other kinds of companies here andthat then opened my eyes to what could be done then out here. And so acouple of years later I left Hayden, Stone and formed the Davis & .Rackpartnership.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well—say more about that. Because there are all kinds of things that I thinkare going on here. One of them is what I’m imagining is quite a differentculture than you’ve been used to on the East Coast .Rack: Absolutely. Just as dress, as you said.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yeah, yeah, the dress—but more than that too, right? I’d rather have you usethe words. But how do you, when you think about those days at Hayden,Stone and the other positions that you’d had on the East Coast and then flashyourself over to the West Coast and talking to the group, the eight, orwhomever you care—how did the conversation go differently and how wasthe mindset different? .Rack: Well, I can’t tell you how it was different, but it certainly was different. Thesepeople, most of whom came from the East Coast—most of them wereschooled at MIT or Harvard or Princeton. I don’t know—I don’t think therewere any Princeton people, but—you know, there has to be a certain drive tomove out West.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: True .Rack: You know, Go West, young man—so that these people were different. Notonly the Fairchild people, but most of the people out here. And then of course,there was Stanford.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right .Rack: Which played a big role in this whole transition.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, talk a little bit about that .Rack: Well, the Stanford provost, or I don’t know if he was provost—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: No, I think he was a provost first, yeah .Rack: Terman.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Terman .Rack: —had the idea that—well, go back. At Harvard and Yale and MIT, professorshad to work full-time at being professors, and Terman had the idea that hecould let these professors loose, one day or two days a week and do otherthings. So a lot of them, then, were able to set up companies, small littlecompanies, where they could try to commercialize some of their ideas. Andthen Stanford had all this land, so they allowed this land—they allowed someof their people to build companies on their land. And so it was a natural forpeople to migrate out here.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right. With the university more or less as the nucleus .Rack: Correct. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that already Stanford Industrial Park? Or was it still .Rack: Oh no, no.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It was much more informal than that .Rack: Well, Stanford Industrial Park was—yeah, it was much more informal. No,this was individual companies. Stanford Industrial Park was an industrial park.No, they just leased some land from Stanford on a—I guess, a ninety-nineyear lease, or whatever. But Terman was really responsible [sound of sirensoutside] for a lot of what has happened out here, in my opinion.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Thinking of some of the tension that occurs on our own campus nowadays,although less so, about what some people see as the rapid commercializationof the academy—were you ever aware that Terman was criticized byacademics for being so friendly to industrial endeavors .Rack: Oh sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yeah, he was, and it just slipped off his shoulders .Rack: Oh I think so.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yeah, and of course, being provost and then he became dean, didn’t he? Ican’t—anyway .Rack: I can’t remember his first name, maybe it was Fred.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Anyway, he had a position at Stanford, that I imagine, to a certain extent hewas untouchable—that there weren’t too many people that could rein him in .Rack: Oh I think so. I don’t know that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yeah, but that’s interesting that you give him a great deal of credit for gettingthings started .Rack: Oh yeah. 30<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All right. Where next? [laughter] We could spend all the time on what becameof the semiconductor industry. But—I know one thing that I’d like to hearfrom you though—we’ve spoken of the famous eight only as a group. Andsome of them, at least in my mind, stand out more than others. But is that fair?I mean, for example, there’s been a wonderful biography of Bob Noyce andthen Eugene Kleiner, because of his connections with venture capital, butwhat about the others? How do they stand in your mind as individuals .Rack: Well, they’re all different, and some of them made a bigger contribution thanothers. No question about it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But quite an impressive group, nonetheless .Rack: Oh yeah. Shockley had the ability—he had won the Nobel Prize, and he couldcall anybody up and say, “I want you to come work for me,” and they’d dropeverything they were doing and go.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Okay. Well, all right. [interruption to change tape]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So Fairchild Semiconductor and then, while you’re still at Hayden, Stone—Teledyne .Rack: Teledyne.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: In 1960 .Rack: I’d been making trips out to California and worked my way down to LosAngeles. Someone there—one of my acquaintances, introduced me to Henry[E.] Singleton and George Kozmetsky. And then a few months or severalmonths later, they called me and said that they were going to leave LittonIndustries, where they were employed, and try to form their own company,and would I be interested in helping them raise the money.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Had you, by now, somewhat of a reputation .Rack: Somewhat. Yeah, they knew who I was. So I said, “Sure,” and it was noproblem, but their reputation at Litton Industries was extremely good. HenrySingleton may have been one of the two or three smartest men I’ve ever met. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is that so .Rack: Very, very intelligent, and it showed very quickly. He had invented thedegaussing system for naval ships, submarines, to get rid of the electricity sothat enemy submarines couldn’t detect the electricity coming out of thesubmarine or whatever. That was a very, very important invention. And thenwhile at Litton, he invented the inertial guidance system, which madepossible—satellites. He was an MIT guy and a PHD, but he didn’t like doingthat stuff anymore. He wanted to run a company. And George Kozmetsky hadbeen a professor at the Harvard Business School and had worked with Henry,so the two of them decided that—they ran what was called the ElectronicsEquipment Division of Litton Industries. So anyway, they decided that they would form a company, and I agreed tohelp them raise the money. I’ve forgotten how much money we did raise, butwhatever it was it was—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Two hundred thousand .Rack: Two and a half million?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I have only $200,000 .Rack: No, no, no, no.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh no, I’m sorry, that was shares .Rack: But it was several million dollars in any event.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That’s obviously misinformation. I don’t know where I got that. What I havewritten down, and unfortunately I didn’t put the reference down is “Mr. .Rack,through Hayden, Stone arranged a private placement of shares in Teledyne tothe amount of $200,000. No .Rack: No. Everything’s right but the number.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I got that from Wilson’s book, The Venturers, but he must have gotten itwrong. .Rack: It’s wrong.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Okay, sorry .Rack: Well, that’s all right. I can find out for you. It was several million, in anyevent.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now were you going—in each of these things, are you going back to more orless the same group of investors .Rack: We had done a couple of deals like this. We had a coterie of people whoinvested.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yeah, and they’re getting pretty pleased with you, aren’t they .Rack: Yeah.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So is it getting easier and easier each time .Rack: Oh yeah. So they went about their business, and I did go on the board there.And at that time, I told them that I was thinking of leaving and forming aventure capital firm, and would they be interested in that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Hayden, Stone .Rack: No, no. Hayden, Stone knew I was doing it also and they were interested, but Iasked Singleton and Kozmetsky, at the time we were doing their deal, whetherthey would be interested in being limited partners at Davis & .Rack.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see, I see .Rack: And they said they would. In that way, not only did I get some stock fromHayden, Stone, but I also then got stock for Davis & .Rack. We exchangedstock for the partnership interest, so we had a pretty big interest in Davis  .Rack and in Teledyne. And of course that grew up to be a fantastic company.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: When they decided that they were leaving Litton, they had a very specific ideaof what they wanted to commercialize? .Rack: I don’t think so. I think their idea was to buy up companies and run thembetter, and that’s exactly what they did.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That was your first board membership, right .Rack: No, I had a couple smaller ones in deals we did, but they didn’t amount tomuch.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that in itself a learning experience? Or were you just .Rack: Oh yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Talk to me a little bit about being a board director—I mean at that stage andwhat you felt was important to convey .Rack: Common sense.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] Yeah .Rack: Just listening to them and trying to figure out if what they wanted to do madesense, and then being able to relay that information to them. I was always veryinterested in the ethics of what they were doing, and was what they weredoing—did it make sense not only from a business point of view, but from anethical point of view—a lot of things you can do that aren’t ethical in thebusiness world.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You don’t say! [laughter] Well, you seem to be going through a period wherethat is quite evident .Rack: {unclear}<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But why did you take that particular emphasis on .Rack: Pardon me?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why did you take that particular emphasis on? You could run things ethically,which I’m sure you did, but it’s a step beyond to then have that be one of yourmessages as a board member. .Rack: Well, it’s so easy to fudge a little bit, so it behooves somebody to think aboutthe consequences of those kind of things.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And did you find you had receptive ears .Rack: Oh yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Where did that come from as far as you were .Rack: It’s just the way I operate.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Maybe going way back to your family of origin .Rack: Probably.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What more to say about Teledyne .Rack: [pause to think] Well, you know, it became a fabulous company until Henrydied, and if he had a fault it was that he didn’t choose his successor orsuccessors very well, and the company kind of fell apart after he left.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you still on the board .Rack: I resigned after a while, yeah. Henry was still alive when the company startedto fall apart, but he was no longer CEO; he had kind of left the company.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And then as you’ve mentioned, you’re about to leave Hayden, Stone. I’m justwondering what people—again, it’s my image of an investment bank, whichmay or may not be accurate, as being quite a conservative place, and yet thisArthur .Rack isn’t being very conservative, by East Coast standards, it seemsto me, going out in the Wild West and investing in all these risky businesses .Rack: Oh yeah, definitely!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So were they just as glad to see the end of you? .Rack: Oh I don’t think so. I was making a lot of money for them! [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh there is that, isn’t there! So then it was probably the opposite—that theyprobably did not want you to go .Rack: Probably not. They did have to put up with a little bit, though.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And what, in the end, was the tipping point for you? To decide to leave and togo .Rack: Oh I wanted to be on my own.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Uh-hmm. Had that for some time been your ambition .Rack: Oh I think so. And also, I had grown very fond of people out here and saw theopportunities and it certainly occurred to me that all the money was on theEast Coast, and all the good opportunities were on the West Coast, and maybeI can bring some East Coast money to the West Coast, which is what I did.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yeah, yeah, so you were kind of the liaison between coasts .Rack: So to speak.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yeah, what about the culture of the West Coast, just in terms of your personallifestyle and deciding, well, at least in the near term, that this is where youwere going to be, this is where you were going to live. Did you have anyregrets about leaving the East .Rack: Oh I love New York, yeah. I like San Francisco more, though.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So moving was not a problem for you personally .Rack: No, I don’t think so. I looked forward to it. Some of my friends thought I wasnuts, but then they always do.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All right. So the next step as I see it, and correct me if I’m wrong, is Davis  .Rack. .Rack: Correct.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Founded in 1961 .Rack: Correct.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I know you’ve told that story, but please tell it again about how you met .Rack: How I met Tommy Davis?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Tommy Davis .Rack: Well, a friend of mine—who I’d met out here, introduced me to Tommy, andhe was with a company called Kern County Land Company. He was a lawyer,but after the war he decided he didn’t want to be a lawyer anymore and hejoined Kern County Land Company. Watkins-Johnson was a company who we did financing for at Hayden, Stone.And that brought me to meet another person who then introduced me toTommy Davis. Tommy Davis, after the war, joined this company inBakersfield, an oil company.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is that the Kern County .Rack: Kern County Land Company! Right. And his mission was to invest some ofKern County Land Company’s oil royalties, and so he invested in WatkinsJohnson. That’s the connection.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see .Rack: And then we did this public offering for Watkins-Johnson and I got to knowTommy Davis. And Tommy then said, “Well, let’s do another deal,” to KernCounty Land Company. And they said, “No, no, no. We just entered thisWatkins-Johnson deal—we want to see how that all works and we’ll be readyto do another deal, maybe, in a couple of years. So Tommy and I got togetherand he said, “I really am frustrated.” And I said, ‘Well, so am I, so let’s formthis partnership.” So that’s how that came about.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh really. .Rack: Yeah, I couldn’t get that story straight in my mind, but I do now.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, you got it in the end. I know just from reading, a little bit about TommyDavis, and it strikes me that you are very different personalities .Rack: Very different.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that a strain .Rack: Yeah, it was a strain.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How would you characterize how that .Rack: Oh we got along all right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But I’m also thinking of businesswise what each of you might havecontributed .Rack: Well, he got along with people a lot better than I did. I tend to be a little short,and he liked to talk and massage people and listen to them a lot. He wasdifferent.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, you have the reputation for being a very good listener .Rack: Oh when I want to listen to somebody and draw them out, yeah.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yeah, they have to be saying something worthwhile, though. [chuckling .Rack: Well, not necessarily. Maybe they’re not.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh and then you make a judgment .Rack: [chuckling] Exactly! Exactly. No, when we were doing those investments—Idon’t have the patience to do it anymore, but when we were doing these deals,I’d spend a lot of time with entrepreneurs, trying to figure out whether theyhave what it takes to run a company. You never find out in the first hour or two. You’ve got to talk to them over and over—we had the luxury, in thosedays, of spending a lot of time with them, over several weeks or months,trying to figure out whether they come back with the same story, or whetherthey contradict themselves, or how badly they really want to do this.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, then what happens today, if you can’t or are unwilling to spend that kindof time .Rack: Well, today—the last few years I don’t know what happened, but from theseventies through the nineties, take that period of time, you didn’t have theluxury of spending time.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Things were moving too fast .Rack: Moving too fast.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yeah, did that bother you .Rack: Oh yeah. So anyway—Tommy Davis and I ran this for—this partnership wasa seven-year partnership and we ran it for seven years.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now is there anything magic to that number .Rack: No.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: No .Rack: Not when you had to do some number of years. [chuckling] Well, it was—youdevelop that because how long does it take to invest the money and how longdoes it take to see some kind of resolution. So seven years, at that time,seemed enough time. Today it would have to be much longer.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yeah, yeah. And it was enough time as it turned out, wasn’t it .Rack: Yes, it was.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It was. Well, is it time to move on to—[brief interruption in recording] Allright. So we have Davis & .Rack founded, and of course, there is Draper,Gaither & Anderson in your vicinity as well. .Rack: Right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Are they and you now calling yourselves venture capital companies orpartnerships .Rack: I don’t know where the term venture capital started, but I think I was the firstto use it. I think I was. I don’t know that for a fact, but I can’t rememberhaving heard the term before I used it, but it’s such a generic type of phrase,that I’m sure somebody else must have used it. But—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you think that’s how you were thinking of yourselves when Davis & .Rackwere founded .Rack: That’s exactly right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And Draper, Gaither & Anderson, maybe, as well .Rack: Probably. I have no idea. I didn’t know them at all.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You didn’t .Rack: No.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But you must have been aware of their existence, weren’t you .Rack: Well, barely, barely. In fact, I embarrassed myself at one of these conferenceswith Bill Draper by saying we were the first venture capitalists, when actuallywe weren’t. They were. But they were such a—they didn’t come on my radarscreen.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, kind of for good reason, too, right? I read somewhere that I think theyhad something like $6 million and had a hard time investing it. There wasno—I don’t have a good picture of why that was .Rack: Well, I don’t think the partners got along, maybe, or something—I don’tknow. 40<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yeah, sometimes you wonder too about—I’ve seen it happen in biotech, forexample, where you get founders with a prehistory—a very strong prehistorythat maybe doesn’t help in the end. And of course, all three of those men,Draper, Gaither & Anderson had had a very rich life before they founded thepartnership .Rack: Well, the first thing they did was build a building down at Stanford—and allthey needed was an office this size.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So that was quite an expenditure right there .Rack: I would think so.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All right. I think your first investment as Davis & .Rack was in Scientific DataSystems .Rack: Scientific Data Systems and Teledyne at the same time, practically the sametime.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because Teledyne was, of course—you were bringing Teledyne with you .Rack: Correct, yeah. I suppose our first check was actually to acquire Teledyneshares. Or that wasn’t a check, it was an exchange of interests, but in anyevent—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yeah, your first transaction .Rack: Yeah, right. But Scientific Data Systems came right thereafter.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right. And tell that story, please .Rack: Well, a fellow who I knew in Los Angeles, who was an intermediary type,actually brought the offering circular of Scientific Data Systems to me to lookat, to see whether we’d be interested. And sure enough, we were. ScientificData Systems was founded by Max Palevsky, a very, very bright man whohad been running—I’ve forgotten what the division was, but the computerdivision, I would guess, for Packard Bell Electronics. And it had been goingfairly well until Packard Bell ran into trouble. They made television sets,Packard Bell television sets, and they got beat out by the Japanese in television. And so they told Palevsky that they couldn’t put any more moneyinto his division. And so he decided to leave and take some of the people with him and thenform this company, which we subsequently named Scientific Data Systems.And it went on to be quite a successful company. As I said, Max was probablyone of the brightest people I met, but he had interests in other things. He wasinterested in politics and being with the beautiful people in Hollywood, and hekind of was anxious to relieve himself of the responsibilities. At the sametime, Xerox came along and offered us a price which was hard to refuse, sowe became part of Xerox.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I read, and again it may not be accurate, that that was your largest return .Rack: Oh a huge return, yeah.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And your largest probably .Rack: Probably.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right, yeah. Unexpectedly? Or did you always think—because there’ssomething to be said .Rack: No, I hoped! [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yeah, you hoped! But there’s also a story behind investing in computers atthat stage, right? Didn’t you get a lot of flack from your friends for—talkabout where computers were at that stage of the game .Rack: No, I didn’t get any flack on that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: No, you didn’t .Rack: I did—a couple of other things I did.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Maybe I’m mixing up stories .Rack: IBM—there were about ten companies in the computer business, and theywere used for business purposes. They were huge computers. They needed air-conditioning and huge rooms. Max’s idea was to make computers forscientific purposes, and our customers were people like JPL [Jet PropulsionLaboratory] and Lockheed and mostly companies doing aerospace kinds ofwork.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see, but anything but personal computers .Rack: Oh no, well, that was way before [that].<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Way before that, yeah .Rack: Yeah.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because we’re 1961, aren’t we .Rack: Formed in 1961 and sold to Xerox in 1969.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And again, I’m quoting Mr. Wilson, that you made $60 million on a $257,000investment .Rack: That’s about right. Actually it was closer to $80 million. [chuckling] We made about thirty times our money on that investment. Thecompany was sold for just short of a billion dollars—$980 million as I recall,which was unheard of in those days. That was—it could have been the biggestpayoff in the sale of a company that ever happened. It could have been. I’mnot sure of that, but it could have been.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You were doing all right .Rack: I was doing just fine, and I had a good time.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And each time you do something like this, is it radiating out into the businessand investment world .Rack: Oh sure. Everybody knows about this.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So that—I would think that raising money is getting easier and easier? No? .Rack: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But also—we haven’t talked too much about the context of all this. And youknow, the image that I have of the sixties—in fact, they’re often called theroaring sixties—was the economy on a swing then? I mean, were thingslooking pretty good .Rack: In this world?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yeah .Rack: No. As a matter of fact, the stock market took a tumble in the sixties, in theearly sixties.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did it .Rack: Yeah. I think they reached a peak in about—well, as a matter of fact, when Ileft Hayden, Stone I was writing a letter, monthly or quarterly, I’ve forgottenwhich, on the various kinds of scientific companies—Hewlett-Packard andVarian and some other—those kinds of companies, and talking about theirprospects and why people should buy their stock. When I left Hayden, Stonethe last letter I wrote said, “These prices are ridiculous and I’m getting out.”And so that’s what happened.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How much are you, when you’re thinking about an investment, how much areyou also factoring in what the stock market is doing and what the generaleconomy is and—the external circumstances of any investment .Rack: Well, up until this recent business, stock markets took swings, but normallythe swings are no more than seven or eight years, so that we were in for a longenough period that it didn’t really affect us.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. All right. I don’t feel—we haven’t done a very good job with ScientificData Systems, though. Is there more that we should be talking about there .Rack: They were a great bunch of people and very, very dedicated.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And was it feeling—was it ahead of its time in filling a market niche? .Rack: Absolutely, absolutely.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And did you foresee that .Rack: Well, I don’t foresee things. I foresee that there’s a possibility of somethinghappening, but I’m not technical enough to really understand what thescientific possibilities are.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But you can see—you can recognize a market need .Rack: Oh I can recognize the market, but I don’t know how big it is or—we had theluxury, in those days, of course, of knowing what everybody else was doing.We knew what IBM was doing, we knew what Sperry Rand was doing, weknew what—what’s the name of the other—Univac was doing. Today youdon’t have that luxury.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because things are too big .Rack: Too big and they’re happening too fast.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That would make a huge difference, I would think .Rack: Oh I think so. I think so.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: The speed and the complexity of things .Rack: Well, the complexity is—in those days, you know, you could fix things. Justlike the difference in a car from a Model T to what—you could fix your ownModel T, but you can’t fix a car today. It’s the same thing.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You’ve brought up, several times, the fact that you don’t have a science andtechnology background. You know—I can see that as being both an advantageand a disadvantage. I mean, you already brought out how if you don’t have ascience background, you’ve got to pay attention to the people, which I think isnot giving you quite the credit that you should [receive]. But how do youfunction in this world .Rack: You don’t; I couldn’t do this today. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Just as simple as that .Rack: I think so.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were there ever deals earlier on, though, in your career that you just didn’t getinvolved with because you felt that you didn’t know enough about the scienceand technology .Rack: No. But I think there would be today. It might be a good time to thinkabout ending this.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I think so. So why don’t we do that, and we’ll continue the saga. I was justabout to do that anyway, because I think the next step is Intel .Rack: Okay.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Does that sound right to you .Rack: Sounds good.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Okay. Is this all right with you, this rather free-form way of doing this .Rack: Yeah, sure. That’s the only way, I think.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All right. Good.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It’s January 27, and it’s a little after 2:00 in the afternoon, and it’s the secondsession with Mr. .Rack .Rack: Correct! [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Last time I believe we stopped after a discussion of Teledyne and ScientificData Systems. .Rack: All right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: If you think that’s the next step, let’s say a little bit about Intel .Rack: All right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Although I must caution you that I wasn’t planning to go through company bycompany by company. Intel, I think is an important one, but then I’ll leave itto you to choose where we go next .Rack: Okay.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But tell me the story of Intel as a beginner, please .Rack: Well, Intel really began with Fairchild Semiconductor, and gradually overtime, six of the eight original Fairchildren left to do various things, leavingGordon [E.] Moore and Bob Noyce still at Fairchild. They became unhappy atFairchild for several reasons. There was an opening to be CEO at FairchildCamera and Instrument Corporation, and Bob and Gordon kind of felt thatBob should have that role, and they elected somebody else to be. And thenthere was the problem of stock options. Fairchild Camera and InstrumentCompany was located in Syosset, Long Island. There’s something wrong withmy voice. [interruption to get water to drink] Anyway, Fairchild Camera andInstrument Company was located in Syosset, Long Island, and like all easterncompanies, they felt that it wasn’t appropriate to give stock options to all theemployees. So there was that problem.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now do you remember their reason .Rack: Well, the reason was that it’s a hierarchical situation and companies justdidn’t give them stock options—only the top executives got stock options inthose days. And on the West Coast, companies started giving stock options,especially startups and young companies, primarily because they underpaidtheir people and thought they should make it up with stock options if thecompany were successful.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was it more that than trying to tie people to the company .Rack: Well, that’s the same thing, sure. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How far back did that go? Was it perhaps Varian, which was sort of asocialistic company—could they have been the first .Rack: I don’t know that Varian was the first. I really have no idea about that, but Ithink the first company that I know of that gave stock options to most of theor ’63.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you have any part of that decision .Rack: Oh yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yeah—and what was your thinking there .Rack: Well, it was partially that we were underpaying our employees; we wanted tokeep the employees, and also we felt that since the employees were making asacrifice to come, they should share in any financial bonanzas that came theirway—kind of a socialist idea, maybe.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [laughing] It doesn’t sound like Arthur .Rack .Rack: Oh you’d be surprised. [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Really? So how did that system work? Did it indeed motivate and keep andfinance—it worked .Rack: Oh yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And other companies began to copy it .Rack: Other companies began to copy it, and it was certainly true in what becameSilicon Valley. So anyway—Noyce and Moore were unhappy for two reasons,and finally they decided that they’d like to leave. Bob called me one day andsaid, “We’re thinking of leaving to form a company,” and I asked him howmillion.” And I said, “Okay. You got it.” No—first I think we first discussedthe terms—how much of the company they would be willing to give toinvestors for putting up $2.5 million, and we agreed on 50 percent. Then I said, “Okay. You’re covered,” and went about raising it, and it didn’t take mevery long.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Really. By then you had a reputation .Rack: I had a reputation; they had a reputation.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And were they pretty savvy businessmen at that stage .Rack: At that stage, yes they were, yeah.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yeah, so they knew exactly how much of the company they should let go andthat sort of thing .Rack: Right, right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And is there a story about those early investors .Rack: [chuckling] Well, the story is that it—of course there was no email or faxmachines in those days, so it took me about a day and a half to reach all of thethirty or so people we had decided to ask, and they all decided that they wouldinvest.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And when you pick the pool of people that you are going to make the offer to,what is it based on .Rack: Based on people I knew that—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yeah, and who have money .Rack: [chuckling] Well, yes, and who have money.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And so it’s not so much that—I mean, it’s not so much that here’s a newtechnology that they might be interested in? It’s more prosaic—these arepeople who have invested before, and I know they’re reputable, and I knowthey have money? .Rack: Well, they all asked what they were going to do, and I wrote a business planmyself, just two-and-a-half pages, double-spaced, which said nothing!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] And it said nothing because you didn’t know yet .Rack: Well, we weren’t going to telegraph what we were going to do for a while.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yeah, but you did know more than you were putting down .Rack: Well, Bob and Gordon certainly did.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yeah, but that in itself shows what kind of trust you had already generatedamongst your following .Rack: Oh yes, yeah. I was never as sure that a company would succeed as I was thatIntel would.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Really .Rack: Yeah, I was 100 percent sure that that company would succeed. I never hadbeen before or since.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And what exactly made you so sure .Rack: Their reputations.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So again it was people .Rack: Definitely.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: This seems to be a theme .Rack: I hope so.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] So you were less interested in what they were going to do? Ormaybe it was more that you trusted what they were going to do? 5 .Rack: I think the latter. Intel’s idea was to make semiconductor memories. Up to thatpoint memories were made from stringing magnetic cores and Intel was aboutto change that. It turns out that if today computers relied on magnetic cores itwould take more than the world’s population to string them.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yeah, I see. All right. I’m asking you the obvious, I know, but I have a strongsuspicion that this is very different than the way it is done nowadays .Rack: Well, what’s happened nowadays is that the lawyers got a hold of these thingsbecause—well, let’s step back: the ERISA laws changed, so that large pensionfunds and endowments could invest in startups. And of course, they hadbundles of lawyers, and lawyers started getting concerned about [how] someof the provisions weren’t written exactly, so the business plans went fromtwo-and-a-half pages to hundred of pages. And then venture capitalistsbecame more technically oriented and had to look into things in detail, so thatall added up to a lot more technology being disclosed and looked at andscrubbed and look[ed at] through a microscope, yeah.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But you told me in the previous interview that because this wasn’t yourbackground—you have an MBA, you don’t have a scientific, technicalbackground—what did this mean for you in the way you did business, the wayyou wrote a business plan .Rack: Well, normally I don’t write business plans. Normally the companies write abusiness plan. But in this case, I just felt that the investors were already thereand all we needed to do was give them a little sheet of paper they could put intheir files.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see, I see. But in terms of your practice—and of course, we’re skippingahead in time because I believe that the critical ERISA law was 1978, whenthings loosened up .Rack: I thought it was ’72, but it may have been ’78. (It was passed in 1974.)<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, there were a whole slew of them, and some of them were actually—andI can’t remember about the ’72—maybe I never knew, but certainly theERISA law of 1974 was actually timing regulations, and my memory is,was when the institutional investors really came into the picture .Rack: That may be. That may be. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yeah, but that’s kind of a watershed, isn’t it, for venture capital .Rack: Oh well, that just allowed all these people who—not only was the lawchanged, but institutional investors didn’t want to invest in technologycompanies and startups because they thought they were too risky. And thenwhen they saw the returns that Davis & .Rack made, they were party to havingthe law changed.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see! That’s interesting in itself. All right—well, I keep pulling you awayfrom Intel itself, so after—I know we could spend ten years on Intel, but we’renot going to .Rack: Okay. [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But what, in your opinion, are the highlights of what became of that company,which, of course, is still going strong .Rack: Well, the highlights were the management. Management consisted of myselfas chairman, Bob Noyce as president and chief executive officer, GordonMoore as vice president. And it eventually evolved—I was chairman for sevenyears—into a moving up of Bob Noyce to be chairman and Gordon Moorepresident, and then Gordon Moore chairman and chief executive officer, andAndy [Andrew S.] Grove becoming president and chief operating officer. Andthen Andy Grove became chief executive officer. That was a succession ofmanagements that is incredible. Each one—if the order were reversed, Intelwould not be, in my opinion, be what it is today, because Bob Noyce,although he was an inventor and invented many of the strategic parts that Intelmade, he was also a promoter. He went around speaking, and beforeCongress, and did these various things to get the company on the map. He wasa salesman, so that was the first requirement.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right .Rack: Then he went on to other things, and Gordon became chief executive officereventually, and at that time, he was the technical guru at the company. He wasmore the strategist; he was the one who figured out what products thecompany should be making, where we should be looking, and that sort ofthing. He did a great job in that, and then when the company got to a stagewhere operations were important, Andy Grove took over. My opinion is that ifthat had been reversed or changed in any form, it would not have worked outas well. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. How much of it was serendipity .Rack: Serendipity—meaning—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, was this—each successive stage, represented in these three men, was itthought out, calculated, that the company needed this sort of direction .Rack: Oh no, no. It was just the natural order of things.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So—that’s serendipity, then .Rack: Well, okay. [laughter] I’m not too familiar with that word.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, you know, that it just happens, and it happens fortuitously .Rack: Well, it didn’t just happen—people were groomed for these things.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But this, again, is back to the theme of personality, isn’t it .Rack: Oh of course!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yeah, so that you knew if Andy Grove was coming in that there was going tobe a slightly different emphasis .Rack: Well, he was chief operating officer before he was chief executive officer.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yeah, exactly, yeah .Rack: So we had time to look at him and see whether he had the capabilities of beingchief executive officer, and luckily he did.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What about your—was this happening in the seven-year period when youwere director? When you were chairman .Rack: Well, I can’t quite remember the timing, but I think Gordon became chiefexecutive officer while I was still there—while I was still chairman. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you have anything to say about your relationship with these three men .Rack: Oh it was great! I enjoyed it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was it all the way across .Rack: Well, we had a few arguments now and then. [chuckling] I admire all of them.They’re my heroes!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yeah—of everyone .Rack: Of all three.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: No, of all the other potential heroes in your life .Rack: Oh no, no, they’re among a small number.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I can see why from the little I know at a distance. I read that one of theimportant decisions, of many, that Intel made—and I apologize in advance forkind of dipping in and maybe not picking out the most important decisions,but one of them, as I understand it, was to change corporate focus frommemory chips to microprocessors .Rack: It certainly was. It was one of the great corporate decisions ever madeanyplace.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is that so .Rack: In my opinion.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What was your role in that .Rack: None! [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Just raising your hand and saying, “Go to it. .Rack: Yeah. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yeah, because there again, they were the ones with the technical expertise .Rack: Correct.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But you were sitting there with your ears flapping, and realizing that this hadto be done .Rack: Well, something had to be done. The Japanese had taken over the memorybusiness by subsidizing their companies, and they were selling below cost.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Are we in the 1980s now .Rack: Somewhere around there. Early eighties.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: The early eighties, right. We talked about stock [options]—I read, and pleasecorrect me, that Intel was the first to give stock options to everyone .Rack: I think that’s true. In fact, I know it’s true. To everyone who had been there ayear or more, as I recall.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right. What did that mean .Rack: What did that mean? [chuckling] It was good socialism! It meant if we weregoing to make a lot of money, they should have a part of it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: They should have a part of it .Rack: Yeah, and we were also underpaying our people a little bit.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You still were underpaying them .Rack: By not as great an amount, because we could afford it, but compared to whatthey could make somewhere else, maybe we were underpaying them.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Has it been your observation that options do really motivate and keeppeople— .Rack: That was true. I don’t believe it is any longer. What’s happened—and wedidn’t foresee at Intel, was that people would cash them in immediately. Wethought people would hold them for their old age or whatever, but peoplewanted to cash them in and get new options all the time. So, at one point—infact I don’t think Intel does this any more, but we were sending the stockdirectly to brokers when they vested, because people just wanted to sell themand buy their houses or send their kids to college or give them braces, orwhatever. So that became kind of a self-defeating thing, and I don’t thinkoptions serve anywhere near the purpose that it did when we first started togive them out.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you look back on Intel and your connection with it as one of the greatachievements of your career .Rack: Oh yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And what else might be there? Because maybe we should move there, unlessyou’ve got more to say about Intel .Rack: No, but—Teledyne, Scientific Data Systems, those are the—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And could we talk about Apple .Rack: Apple, sure. I was not the original venture capitalist in Apple. I didn’t makemy investment until a year or so after the company was founded.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that Don [Donald T.] Valentine .Rack: Don Valentine bought stock in the company and sold it. He didn’t like themanagement at all, and I don’t know how long he owned stock—or Sequoiadid. But Mike Markkula, who was a marketing VP at Intel left after a while.He had made enough money in his Intel options, and he and I were friendly.He called me one day and said, “Hey, Arthur, you’d better take a look at thisApple.” I said, “Okay.” And he—I’m not sure what order of things transpired,but he had me go down to a computer show in San Jose, so I went down thereand they were all—nobody had a computer to show, but parts of computers,so people could make their own, assemble them. And there was nobody at theshow at any booth except the Apple booth. Everybody was lined up trying toget into the Apple booth, and I couldn’t even get to it. And so I said to myself,Jesus, it’s got to be something here—and then it was either before or after—I mean, this happened a long time ago—I met with Steve Jobs and SteveWozniak, and they were very unappealing people.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Meaning .Rack: Well, I’ll tell you exactly what I mean. Jobs came into the office, as he doesnow, dressed in Levi’s, but at that time that wasn’t quite the thing to do. And Ibelieve he had a goatee and a moustache and long hair—and he had just comeback from six months in India with a guru, learning about life. I’m not sure,but it may have been a while since he had a bath.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] Just your type .Rack: And he was very, very thin—and to look at [him]—he really belongedsomewhere else. Steve Wozniak, on the other hand, had a full beard and he’sjust not the kind of a person you’d give a lot of money to. But I guess thatcame first and then I went down to the computer show. I’m not sure which.But because Mike had already invested $300,000 of his own money—that is,he guaranteed a bank note for a third of the company. At that point MikeMarkkula, Steve Jobs, and Steve Wozniak each owned a third of the company.I didn’t want to bet against Mike Markkula, or what I saw there, so that’swhen I became an investor.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It was really as simple as that .Rack: [chuckling] That’s it!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And then what happened .Rack: Great things!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, what is there about Apple that—I think it’s still true, but you correct meagain there, that not only is it an extremely successful company, and maybethis is a stupid question because of that, but hasn’t it served as a model formany, many other companies, particularly in Silicon Valley? And why, if thatindeed is true, what is there about it, aside from its success .Rack: First let’s step back a ways. Apple was successful, highly successful, and itwas clear to everyone that they needed a CEO. We went out and hired JohnSculley to be CEO, and he ran the company as CEO for ten years, eight of which were very successful. The last two were not so successful. Steve Jobswas a problem; he was very headstrong, very much the enfant terrible, orhowever you pronounce that. He upset people at the company and wanted todo his own thing, and wouldn’t tell people what he was doing—and yet hewas one of the big stockholders. So finally, we had to take his position awayfrom him, and then he left and formed his own company, which didn’t sit toowell with what he wanted to do versus what Apple was doing. And then wehad to ask John Sculley to leave; he was having home life problems andmoved to Connecticut and then was commuting, and you can’t run a fastmoving company like Apple. And then the company went downhill fast, andat one point, it was near bankruptcy.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you on the board .Rack: No, I was not on the board. I had—remind me to tell you that story in aminute. Somehow Steve, with his great charm, was able to sell the littlecompany that he had to Apple, and then kicked the guy out who was thenchairman or CEO of Apple and became CEO of Apple again. And that’s abrand new story.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yeah, I’d forgotten that interim—but you’re absolutely right, it wasn’t just astring of successes .Rack: Oh no, oh no. And Steve was even so charismatic that he got one of itscompetitors, Microsoft, to invest in Apple because otherwise Apple wouldhave gone bankrupt. Steve is a national treasure; there’s no doubt about it inmy mind, but he doesn’t invent things. All he does is take other people’s ideasand promote them. He has design ideas; he has ideas where things should go,but he doesn’t do it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But could you credit him with perfecting them? I understand he’s a hugeperfectionist .Rack: Oh yes. But somebody else has got to have—has the basic idea.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Come up with it .Rack: Steve Wozniak had it in the beginning, and there are other people who havehad great ideas that Steve Jobs has been able to promote.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What happened to Wozniak? .Rack: I think Wozniak now teaches school.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Really .Rack: I think so; I think that’s right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How long did he stay with the company? I don’t need exact years, but .Rack: Not long.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: A short time, a short time. All right. I gather that there’s a story about you andthe board and leaving it .Rack: Oh—well, Apple decided that they should have a semiconductor designfacility, which I thought was a good idea, because we were using so manysemiconductors, seeing whether we couldn’t design better ones. And then Ithink it’s probably announced at a board meeting, but I didn’t pay muchattention to it, that they had entered into a joint venture with Motorola andTexas Instruments [means IBM; corrects himself below] to design what theycalled a PowerPC. And then, lo and behold, in the newspaper, all the majornewspapers, they took a two-page ad in every newspaper you could think of,announcing that they were ready to ship the PowerPC, which I did not knowthey were going to manufacture—but that’s not important—but that they weregoing to kill Intel. Literally—that’s what it said. At that point, I resigned.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I can imagine. What was the effect of that ad .Rack: Oh a lot of talk, not much happened. No, I beg your pardon—I think Appleused the PowerPC for quite a while.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So the ad served them well, would you say .Rack: Oh I don’t know. I don’t know whether it served—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It seems a sort of a dicey decision to make. [chuckling] And it obviouslydidn’t sit very well with you. .Rack: [laughing] I don’t think they cared much about whether it did or not. Maybe itwasn’t Texas Instruments—it was IBM. It was IBM, Apple, and Motorola.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is it true—as I read, that at least in the beginning Jobs and Wozniak were hellbent to take the company public as soon as they could and make a killing? Doyou remember that being true .Rack: I don’t think that’s true.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You don’t think that’s true .Rack: I think the company went public when they needed money. The two Stevesdid not sell any stock in the public offering.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, Apple went public in December 1980, and that was just .Rack: Somewhere up there there’s a copy of the offering prospectus.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All right. Genentech had gone public in October. Is there any connectionbetween those two events .Rack: No.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: If you remember—it was simply that it was time for Apple .Rack: It was time, yeah, it was time.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It was time .Rack: Yeah, they needed the money.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because the other thing that I’ve read is that the—not necessarily just thosetwo IPOs, but because they were both spectacular IPOs, that there was now anopening for a very propitious time for initial public offerings in the earlyeighties .Rack: That’s right. 60<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yeah. And it’s probably very naïve to think that you can hang that simply onGenentech and Apple’s very successful IPOs .Rack: Well, that was part of the reason that the IPO market became hot.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What else was going on then .Rack: I have no idea. [<|endoftext|>
Interviewer chuckles] My dementia won’t—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You know I do know a little bit more about Genentech, and I know that at thatpoint it had no products; it was only marginally profitable. Did you notice anyof that and think anything about it? Or was it just another company that you’dnever paid much attention to going public .Rack: The latter.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: The latter. Is that somewhat—I’m not aware of you having invested inbiotech .Rack: Never.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Never—and is there a reason .Rack: Yeah, I don’t understand it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh. [chuckling] But you’re saying that in a sense you don’t understand .Rack: [tentatively] Yeah, but—by that time, you really had to begin to understandthe technologies.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Something, yeah. So you religiously steer away from .Rack: No I didn’t religiously stay away from it. I’ve got to tell you, I didn’t havemany opportunities, either.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is that so! .Rack: Well, Genentech was, by itself, was the first biotech company formed, andcertainly was alone for quite a while.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, certainly alone in being a public company. There were others beginningto form by then. And Cetus went public right thereafter .Rack: Is that right? I don’t remember that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yeah, it went public in 1981, and I guess you could call it a biotech company.It’s a qualified biotech company—it was certainly a biology-basedcompany .Rack: Biology, yeah.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: —which probably is the same thing in your mind, which is perfectlylegitimate. I was just wondering if there was a momentum, but it doesn’tsound as though .Rack: Well, there was a momentum—the stock market always has fads.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How much does that enter into your thinking .Rack: Well, you’ve got a fad now where nobody can go public!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [laughing] I read that there was one IPO in 2008. Is that indeed true .Rack: That’s probably right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: The other thing that I read and that surprised me a little about Apple wasthat—and I suppose this was long after you had left the board—but in the late1980s, Apple actually operated its own venture capital fund. Do youremember anything about that .Rack: Sure. It actually began while I was still on the board.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What did you think about that? .Rack: I thought it was a mistake.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And why .Rack: [pause] Because—people—Intel has a huge venture capital firm. They havethe biggest venture capital firm in the business.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Does it. I didn’t know that .Rack: It’s called Intel Capital, and I think that’s a mistake, because unless you haveskin in the game, I don’t think you can do an objective job.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Skin in the game .Rack: Yeah—you haven’t heard that expression?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: No, I haven’t .Rack: I’ll be darned!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I’m not a venture capitalist .Rack: [chuckling] Well, you don’t have to—that expression goes way beyondventure capital. But skin in the game—meaning that you have something tolose if it doesn’t work out.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh I see. All right. All right. But how does that apply .Rack: Well, if you have some of your own money at stake, that’s skin in the game.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yeah .Rack: Well, if you’re doing it for Apple, you don’t have your own—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Okay, I see—from that [perspective]—I’m thinking of it from the company’sstandpoint. You’re talking about the individual’s standpoint. .Rack: Right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Okay, now I get it .Rack: So I don’t think decisions are necessarily made on the right basis.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. And yet—could that not have also applied to all the venture capitalbranches that were, and still are in some cases, attached to banks .Rack: Yes, absolutely. And most of them have not been successful. In fact, I don’tknow any that have been successful.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And it is that—you need that personal touch, that personal .Rack: Involvement.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yeah, involvement. And you carry that on to these business-related venturecapitals or bank-related venture capital .Rack: Yeah, most of them have folded up. Intel is really the only one that’s goingnow, I think. Although I’ve read that a couple of companies including Googlehave very recently entered the fray.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do they pretend to nurture companies as well .Rack: Well, some of them make the excuse for doing it, which Intel does, and doessuccessfully, in that they try to grow companies that can be of help to Intel.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. So there is a rationale to it all .Rack: Yes. [interruption in recording; .Rack briefly leaves room]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [abrupt beginning] I want to—but let’s go there right now .Rack: All right. Are you set? If you want to learn about one of my biggest losers itwas Diasonics [Inc.]. They were the first company in the ultrasound business and the first company to make what’s now MRIs, Magnetic ResonanceImaging machines.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What decade was this .Rack: Pardon?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [louder] What decade was this .Rack: Probably early eighties.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh okay .Rack: That company did well. It had a public offering. People made a lot of moneyin the public offering, and then it went close to bankruptcy and was sold for avery little amount of money. Two problems: first problem was that the MRImachines, which were then called NMR, for Nuclear Magnetic Resonance—that name didn’t go over very well because people thought they were going tobe nuked.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, right .Rack: So we changed to MRI, Magnetic Resonance Imaging. The machines sold fora lot of money—$1.5 million or something like that. And we were profitablemaking those machines until General Electric and Siemens decided that theyhad to be in the business. It wasn’t a question of they wanted to; they had tobe in the business.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: For competitive reasons .Rack: Well, they were in the medical instrument business.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see, and this was a going thing .Rack: This was the hot item.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yeah, I see. .Rack: So they went around to hospitals—most of our customers were hospitals—infact probably all of them were at that time and said, “Don’t pay for it now.Use it for a year, see how you like it, and if you like it you can buy it—otherwise, turn it back.” Well, we could not afford to do that, and so we had alot of trouble selling our machines after a while. The competitive aspect justgot too tough for us. The other problem that arose was that the CEO felt that he had to satisfy WallStreet and make his numbers, and it turned out that he couldn’t make hisnumbers and the company got into trouble with the financial community andthe SEC and so on, mostly having to do with revenue recognition. But thatwould not have happened, I don’t think, if it wasn’t for the problem with GEand Siemens. So that was a big blow to me.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was it? Was that your first big failure .Rack: Oh a big failure, yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You’d had little ones .Rack: I had a lot of minor failures.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, when you say he needed to meet his numbers—doesn’t everybody haveto do that .Rack: But you don’t have to put out numbers.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see, and he had actually put out numbers .Rack: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. Were you able to advise him otherwise? Or was that just something hedid without consulting .Rack: Well, I should have known. I consider it partially my fault. I should havefigured it all out, but I didn’t.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You mean by just figuring out what sort of a person he was? .Rack: Well, both that way and by just examining the numbers.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. I see. Well, I would think that you couldn’t expect yourself to beabsolutely on top of everything there .Rack: Well, I was chairman of the audit committee. I should have—so in any event,that was my big failure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That was your big failure and you take some responsibility for it .Rack: Of course.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And maybe this actually applies, but this is getting into the more generalquestions, which you are very welcome to apply to specific cases, and this is avery Arthur .Rack—but you have been quoted to say, and my source was Riskand Reward. Do you know that book? [Venture Capital and the Making ofAmerica’s Great Industries,] by [Thomas] Doerflinger and [Jack] Rivkin [andBill Moyers.] Anyway—the quote is Arthur .Rack saying, “Nearly everymistake I’ve made has been because I picked the wrong people, not the wrongidea. .Rack: That’s correct.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I know that’s a theme that’s been carried through all our talks, but would youalso say that that was maybe true in the case of the CEO of the MRIcompany .Rack: Absolutely.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yeah. But how .Rack: There were warnings.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were there? I would think it would be very dicey, though, to know when isthe time to take action .Rack: You always take action six months too late. [<|endoftext|>
Interviewer laughs] <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yeah, but isn’t that very human .Rack: [chuckling] Oh I’m not saying I’m inhuman! [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: No, no, no—but I would think .Rack: Yes, of course.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You’re not going to take action on the first thing that goes wrong .Rack: That’s right, that’s absolutely—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So there has to be a build-up .Rack: That’s right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yeah, and I guess it’s knowing what point in that build-up when to takeaction .Rack: That’s right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And what is that about? Is that again reading people? Or experience? Or both .Rack: Both.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All right. You’ve probably already said this, but maybe you could say it in anutshell—how you would characterize in a few words, your investmentstrategy and style .Rack: [pause] Oh I think we covered that ad nauseum. It’s investing in people.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] Investing in people, and that’s really the way you want it to godown .Rack: That’s right. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yeah, that’s enough .Rack: That’s my strategy and that’s my style.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That’s your style, all right. I just wanted to make clear that there wasn’t moreto it. [reviewing list of questions] A lot of these, you’re absolutely right, wehave covered. What about geographic proximity? Is that a necessity .Rack: It is for me. I limited almost all the investments to California, places I couldget to very quickly.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: As part of your wanting to be part of the management of the company .Rack: Correct. And very hands-on.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is that changing nowadays? Not you, but others .Rack: Oh now it’s the world! People are investing in India and China andKazakhstan.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And not necessarily spending a lot of time in those places .Rack: No, it’s become a much more institutionalized business.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, talk to me a little bit more about the changes that you’ve seen in yourcareer .Rack: Well, these large venture capital firms that are around now—they havebillions of dollars, and they have a few partners—maybe ten, twenty, and theymake investments on orders of hundreds of millions of dollars. You divide thehundreds of millions of dollars, or $20 million, or whatever, into the amountof capital they have, and you come out with—that each partner’s got to look atten or twenty investments and where does he have time? It’s just amathematical—I can’t tell you what the figures are, but it’s—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: No, but I can see it, you know, you just .Rack: So they don’t have the time, and they’re also looking for new investments. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, you’d said before that the pace and diversity, I guess you would call it—the number of investments that people nowadays have is just something thatyou wouldn’t want to handle. [pause to change tape]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It’s still January 27, and this is the fourth and last tape of the second sessionwith Mr. .Rack. I’m going to jump to the cover of Time magazine [January 23]in 1984, in which the artist clothed you in a suit of money. I wondered whatyou thought about that, and did you know in advance that that is indeed whatTime magazine was going to do .Rack: Well, I had hoped they wouldn’t do the story at all.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh really? Why was that .Rack: I did not cooperate with them one bit. I did not give them an interview.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Really? .Rack: No.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I didn’t know that .Rack: I didn’t want that publicity.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And why .Rack: I just didn’t want it. What did I need it for?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, one could say to spread the word that this man seems to know how tohandle money .Rack: I didn’t need to have that word spread! [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It was spread enough. [chuckling] But you know—and you don’t have to talkabout this, but I wonder if you have a philosophy about how you do handleyour money. I’m thinking this may be going further than you want to go, but 70we’ve talked a lot about how you handle investments in a business sense. Ijust wondered if you and the many colleagues like you who have been in thisindustry for a time and have, to put it frankly, made a lot of money—what isyour philosophy about handling your own personal money in terms of societyor however you want to look at it in that sense. I’m not phrasing this verywell, but do you understand what I’m trying to .Rack: I understand what you’re saying and—you know various of my breed dodifferent things.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, I know .Rack: I personally am quite involved with children’s scholarships, K-8 education.That’s my passion these days.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Having three children, I cannot agree with you more that that’s veryimportant. Can you say something about [of] all of the things that you couldhave chosen why it is that .Rack: Sure. Because only 40 percent of inner-city kids graduate from high school,and unless we can improve that, these kids are going to have nothing to do inthis society, which is now electronic. You can’t get a job in a car factorypushing cars around. It’s all done. So they’re going to get jobs either flippinghamburgers or peddling drugs, and we’re well on our way to losing our placein society, economically—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: We as a country .Rack: As a country. You know Tom [Thomas L.] Friedman wrote a book called,“The World is Flat: [A Brief History of the Twenty-first Century], well, it isn’t.It’s tipped toward China, Japan, India, etc. And the reason that these kidsdon’t do well, in my opinion, is that they’re not taught well, and they’re nottaught well because of the teachers union. I think the teachers union is afascist organization, and so I’ve gotten involved—I’m president of somethingcalled the BASIC Fund. The BASIC Fund—BASIC stands for Bay AreaScholarships for Inner-City Kids. And we give scholarships to 5400 kids inthe Bay Area to attend the private school of their choice. And then I’m on theboard of Teach for America and I’m involved with KIPP.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What is KIPP? .Rack: Knowledge is Power Program—charter schools and all of these organizationshave improved the lives of kids tremendously. In KIPP and in the Basic Fund,where we send kids to school—those kids have gone from 40 percent whograduate to 80 percent. So it can be done.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes .Rack: And Teach for America gets college graduates, right out of college, to teachfor two years, and they’ve done extremely well.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That’s one of the programs that Obama is anxious to spread .Rack: Exactly, yeah. We had 27,000 college graduates apply to be Teach forAmerica teachers this year.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is that so .Rack: And we could only accept about 5,000.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: My heavens. Is there any place else you can put them? [laughter] And theBASIC Fund—where does the funding come from .Rack: Me.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh it’s all you .Rack: No, a third. A third is me. A third is from the Walton Foundation and a third isfrom the other members of the board.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, congratulations. It sounds like a .Rack: So that’s what I’m doing.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is that mainly what you’re doing now .Rack: Well, I’ve done some other things—set up a program at the CaliforniaAcademy of Sciences for every kid in San Francisco in the fourth grade to go to the academy, with their teacher in a bus, and give them lunch and spend themorning at the academy—every kid in San Francisco.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Wow. And that’s happening .Rack: It’s happening, now, yeah.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Good .Rack: Half of the kids in San Francisco will have gone there—but it’s only beenopen since November, so by next year 100 percent of the kids.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Marvelous .Rack: They’re called .Rack Scholars or .Rack Kids, or something. I’ve forgotten.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Very good. Enough on philanthropy .Rack: That’ll be fine.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I know we’re racing through. Have you had any close connection with eitherof the venture capital associations? National Association of Venture Capital[means National Venture Capital Association] and the West Coast [meansWestern] Association of Venture Capital [ists] .Rack: None.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: No membership .Rack: No.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: No, nothing. Why is that .Rack: I think they’re kind of self-serving.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you really are a free spirit. .Rack: [chuckling] I suppose.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I’m coming to the end—I’m sure—oh I know one thing I wanted to hearyour opinion about and that’s California as a setting for venture capital. Iknow it’s changing; I know it’s spreading out around the world, but still, Ibelieve it’s fair to say that the nucleus of venture capital is still in this area .Rack: That’s correct.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And specifically, I guess, in Silicon Valley, although here we sit in SanFrancisco. Why is that .Rack: [pause] For a couple of reasons: first of all, California is always a place thatpeople came to looking to change their lives and the old, “Go West, youngman.” And there’s a free spirit out here that didn’t exist and couldn’t exist inthe East. So that’s one reason. The other reason is that at Stanford the provost,and before that the head of the engineering school, was a fellow named FredTerman. He had the bright idea of letting his post docs take a day off a weekto go work someplace—to form a company or do whatever they wanted to do.That’s how Hewlett and Packard and Varian got started. This was unknown atschools in the East.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: MIT wasn’t doing anything [like that] .Rack: It did not do that. So these peoples formed companies, Varian and HewlettPackard, and so on. And he also prevailed on Stanford—they had all this landout there, to let companies build plants on their property and give them a longterm lease. And so the atmosphere was created. So those two reasons arereally what—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And that area became Stanford Industrial Park, right .Rack: Correct.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So that means, in that particular case, bringing technology—people with ideasinto proximity, because one of the things that one reads about Silicon Valleyis that it’s just a cauldron of ideas that people are sharing, supposedly freely. Isuppose it’s selective, but it’s a very porous place that ideas are floatingaround in a way that perhaps doesn’t happen as freely on the East Coast? .Rack: Well, it certainly didn’t. Everything was very close in and tight.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And I suppose with everything being electronic now, that that’s less true .Rack: Oh I think that, yeah.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you want to say anything in terms of the culture of this region as perhapsanother factor .Rack: Well, it’s the people who came out here who were free spirits, so to speak. Idon’t know what else to say about it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, people talk too about the—failure does not condemn you .Rack: Well, that’s a worldwide thing—that’s why there isn’t new startups or wasn’tnew startups in Europe, because once you failed, you were through.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right, yeah .Rack: And here, it’s a learning experience.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But is that less true in Europe nowadays .Rack: Oh yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So it really has become a global culture .Rack: Oh yes. I think it’s still more true here. But definitely the culture has changedworldwide.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you want to say, in ending, your feelings about what venture capital mayhave meant for American innovative power, American innovation? Or is thatjust too general a question .Rack: [pause] Well, it certainly fostered a lot of companies that wouldn’t havehappened. I can’t see how Intel or Scientific Data Systems could havehappened without venture capital. And it’s still true today, but not to the same extent, because the amount of money required is almost corporate to start up anew business.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So venture capital can’t play as large a role .Rack: I don’t think so. And I don’t think venture capital, over the long term, will bea profitable business.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Really .Rack: So far I’m right, but we’ll see.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You mean thinking of what’s happening to us now with the economic[downturn] .Rack: Oh no, not just now. It started six, seven, eight, years ago. Only two or threefirms are going to be profitable.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Just because there’s too much competition .Rack: Too much competition.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, then what will that mean for the country’s economy .Rack: I don’t know, because the venture capitalists today are not interested in smallcompanies. They’ve got too much money. They can only be interested in hugethings.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Maybe that will change. Maybe that will be one of the silver linings thatcomes in .Rack: Well, let’s hope so.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] All right. Shall we end there .Rack: Good. Thank you. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I thank you for your time and your willingness to talk to a naïveinterviewer. 
Interviewer: It is the 18th of September, and this is the first interview with Tom Perkins.We’re in a conference room at Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers in SanFrancisco. As usual, I want to start at the beginning—namely with yourfamily, upbringing, education. Perkins: Okay. Well, I grew up in the East, a suburb of New York basically, WhitePlains, New York. I went to White Plains High School and was kind of a nerd.I was involved in a lot of technical things back then. I built kit television setsto sell to neighbors and friends, and I had a lot to do with little experiments inphysics and stuff that I was interested in, in my tiny little laboratory in mycloset in my bedroom.Nobody in my family had ever gone to college, and I wasn’t planning to goeither. Fortunately, I had a physics teacher, Mr. Wilson, who thought he sawsome talent in me, and he prevailed upon my parents to let me go to college.There wasn’t any money, so I had to get a scholarship in order to finance it.So I applied to both Harvard and MIT, and I got accepted to both, but MIThad a better scholarship so that’s where I went. And between the scholarshipand borrowing money from the institution and borrowing some money from arelative, I was able to do it. I was going to major in physics, and abouthalfway through the program I decided that I wasn’t smart enough to be verygood physicist, so that I should probably switch into something morepractical. So I switched into electronic engineering.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What made you think you weren’t smart enough? Perkins: [chuckling] My competition. Well, I was in a class with about five others inphysics, and one or two of those were just so brilliant that it was absurd tothink that I could swim in those waters.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So up until then you hadn’t been thinking particularly of practicality? Perkins: No, no. I think I was interested in the science of it all, and I still am. Still tothis day, I can’t resist reading— There’s a new biography that’s just come out,which I hope to get tomorrow, on Paul Dirac, and I can hardly wait to read it.Quantum theory, you know, I just love it. I’ve read bookcases full of stuff inscience, the history of science and all of that. Parenthetically, I think thatalmost uniquely among venture capitalists I have used my technical insightpretty consistently throughout my entire career. I have not been afraid of thetechnology, and I’ve been ready to plunge in, learn it, deal with it, and help itdevelop. I have not felt the need to call upon consultants to tell me what it wasall about. Not that we didn’t use consultants—of course we did. But thisnerdish aspect of my life has been pretty consistent, and still to this day.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But there are other venture capitalists, indeed some that I have talked with,who came out of technical backgrounds—engineering and that sort of thing.Are you saying that you used that background? Perkins: Well, I think what’s unique about Kleiner Perkins when Eugene Kleiner and Istarted it— We were not like any other firm, and we can get into that a bit, butI may be jumping too far.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, yes, but just finish that thought, that you were very technically oriented. Perkins: Not just that, but we were also very hands-on oriented. We would run thesecompanies; we would run them in the sense that we would get them startedwith very junior or inexperienced people, and we would provide everythingbut the key idea, which they had. We were willing to back, pretty much, ideasrather than teams of people. I think we were totally unique in that. That is amajor distinguishing feature of us, and it also explains our success.It’s very simple to understand. If somebody has a good idea and they want toraise money to start a company, to execute the idea, if it’s just at the ideastage, it’s going to be extremely hard to get other people that are any good towork in that venture. I mean, you are going to need a marketing person and amanagement, manufacturing, whatever. Why would anybody very good,particularly in the early days of venture capital before it was clear that thiswould all work, why would anybody very good do that? If you think about it,they wouldn’t, they really wouldn’t do it. So if you say, “I want a completeteam; I want to see the finance, the marketing, the manufacturing, thetechnology, the whole thing, everybody there, so I can see what I what I amgoing to invest in.” You will end up having to get rid of most of them (thepeople, that is) because they are no good! [laughter]It’s much better to take the technical risk out of it with the initial money,whatever the technical risk is. Kleiner and I were very, I think, good at this—figuring out how to use the least amount of money to get rid of whatever therisk in the deal was. It might have been marketing, technology, maybe legalpatents, whatever—reduce that and then pour in the money and then you canhire the good people and you’ve got a great venture. I think we kind ofinvented that, and back in the day we were all alone in doing venture capitalthat way.I mean, the Arthur Rocks of the world.Arthur is a financier in my opinion; he is not a management person. Hisapproach was completely different. Tommy Davis, Bryan and Edwards, BillDraper—I don’t mean to denigrate them, but they all worked on that earlier[model]: let’s look at the whole thing; we’ll put our money down and take ourchances. Kleiner and I said uh-uh, we’ll fill in the gaps personally, and we’llprobably finance the whole thing because nobody else will play the game theway we will. So anyway, we were different in that aspect, and of course itworked and now that has become— But what I’m saying now is no longerstartling, or different, or revolutionary, but in the beginning it was.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You are including in that financing the whole thing? Perkins: Financing the whole thing.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: People were taking pieces but not— Perkins: Well, no, if you look at our two big hits in the first investment fund,Genentech and Tandem Computers, we essentially financed it all. We did nothave partners.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You didn’t? Perkins: No, we didn’t have partners. We didn’t have partners. We did it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, well, I’ve let you jump ahead. It was my fault. Let’s go back to MIT. Perkins: Back to MIT, right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And what was it like? I’m imagining your family as not being extremelysophisticated. What was it like just coming from Illinois and landing in whatmust have been a very sophisticated setting. Perkins: Well, Illinois, and then White Plains, New York, and then MIT.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, White Plains. I’m sorry. Perkins: Well, my life changed totally. It turned out I was an excellent swimmer. Atone point I held the national record for about two weeks.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [laughter] That you’d started doing in high school? Perkins: No, no, we didn’t have a pool in high school. So I was not in any way athleticor a jock in high school, quite the reverse. I was the guy that always knew theanswers to the technical stuff but didn’t get invited to the parties. At MIT itturned out the first weekend I was there I tried out for the swimming team,and in the tryout I nearly broke the pool record. I came very close to it, whichjust astonished the coach. So of course he insisted I become— I becamecaptain of the freshman swimming team, and I swam for four years at MIT. Iwent from being a nerd in a school of jocks to a jock in a school of nerds,which was pretty amazing [chuckling]. So it changed my life.I joined a fraternity and I enjoyed— MIT is a tough school, and the highschool I went to, White Plains High School, did not teach calculus, which wasa requirement for MIT. But they waived it because I had excellent grades, butI needed the calculus. So the first year at MIT was just bewildering. I hadnever been thrown into anything so difficult in my life, but it worked.So I graduate. I am now an electronic engineer. I owed everybody money, so Ihad to make as much money as I could to pay it back—the school, myrelatives, the loans, and so on. So I went to work for the Sperry GyroscopeCompany overseas in some pretty tacky places. But they paid very well, and Italked about that in the book [Valley Boy: The Education of Tom Perkins]. Idid that for two years. I had decided when I graduated from MIT that I wantedto go into business, not that anybody in the family that had been in business oranything, but that I wanted a broader scope than just engineering. So I appliedto Harvard [Business School] and got accepted at Harvard and then had towork a couple years to make the money to pay for it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you realizing that money was the name of the game and maybe that wasa faster way to get to it? Perkins: I think, in the beginning, making a lot of money was not what I thought Icould or would do. I just wanted something more interesting than designingcircuits, although I was pretty good at designing circuits, but there is just moreto it than that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was this result of the blossoming of the social Mr. Perkins? Maybe havingmore chance to deal with people? Perkins: Probably. I don’t think I realized, until I got to Harvard, that I was pretty goodat dealing with people and that I thought in ways that would make it easy tomanage people. I wasn’t aware of that until I got to Harvard, and I foundHarvard almost trivially simple. Maybe it’s an egomaniacal thing to say, but Iwas surrounded by people that were just suffering from it all. This was themost difficult thing they had ever done, these cases and oh my God, andwriting them up and analysis and everything. To me, it was just fun and easyand trivial, almost. So I did very well at Harvard, and I think I began torealize, yes, you might be pretty good at this.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Before you leave Harvard, I need to hear your comments on Georges Doriot. Perkins: Oh yes, well he probably goes through a lot of the histories you’ve collected.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: He does! [chuckling] Perkins: Well, he was a remarkable man; he was a friend. I have been fortunate enoughto collect mentors along the way. This Mr. Wilson in high school was the first,and then Georges Doriot was certainly the second. He taught in the secondyear of the business school. He was rather controversial at Harvard because hedid not use the case method, which is what Harvard is based upon; instead helectured. But his course was very popular, and he was a very powerfulmember of the faculty, but kind of an exception.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why was he so popular? Perkins: Well, he was very popular with a certain kind of student, like me, who felt thata man like that who had accomplished what he had could indeed be a mentor,teach you, help you tremendously. There were other students who thought hewas just a windbag and didn’t respect him and wouldn’t have anything to dowith him. So the students kind of divided up. He was not universally popular,and it wasn’t extremely difficult to get— I mean his course was not rationed;you could take his course. Anybody that wanted to take it could get into it.However, I found him extraordinary. He was a wonderful mix; he wascharming, brilliant, very accomplished, very opinionated, and he was notembarrassed to teach a bunch of young men: this is the way you shouldbehave in life, literally.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And that must have been very different. Perkins: Very different. “Don’t drink too much.” I mean, we are talking really not onlyhow you should behave but this is the way other people that you will meet inbusiness will behave. I can remember him saying, “The chief financial officerwill drink scotch; the chief engineer will drink beer and get drunk on it.” Imean, crazy things like that. I mean, you could say, “This is a professor atHarvard? Come on!” [<|endoftext|>
Interviewer chuckles] But he was absolutely right! As youfind out. He had this wonderful French accent [imitating Doriot’s accent],“Gentlemen someday you will want to kill an engineer.” Well, of course, allthe time! [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Or an investment banker. Perkins: No, no. Well, I think maybe my bias against Wall Street started with him. Ihave a notorious bias against Wall Street, and maybe it started with GeorgesDoriot.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because he did? Perkins: Well, it’s so long ago, and every three or four years Wall Street gives you areason to hate them. This last iteration was unbelievable. If you looked at mybook [Valley Boy: The Education of Tom Perkins], I trash investment bankers,known I should have done it [the trashing] even more.The name of Doriot’s course was Manufacturing, not Finance.Manufacturing—a good business has to make something, sell it, satisfycustomers. The essence of business is manufacturing, which I agree with, andnot financial manipulations, and all of that. He did, I thought, a brilliant job ofteaching a bunch of young guys how to behave, and you either loved him oryou hated him. And I loved him.Maybe the second lecture that he gave, he said that he wanted the wholeclass—there was, I don’t know, maybe eighty people in the class, maybe notthat many—to break up into groups of about eight individuals per group,because you are going to work on projects. You are going to have to find twocompanies and consult for them and help them; and you are going to have towrite a paper on some topic that I (Doriot) will approve. So, a bunch of usformed a group, and then he said, “Now you must pick a leader of yourgroup.” And they picked me, and after that had happened, then he said, “Nowlet’s talk about who you picked and why did you pick your leader.” This isafterwards. He basically said, “You’ve picked the person that you would trustyour money with, and if you didn’t pick that person, you have not picked theright leader. Isn’t that interesting?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, it is. Perkins: Anyway, so I was the leader, and we did do two companies, and it was funand interesting, and then I invited him to join us at a dinner where the twocompanies got together, and that was a lot of fun. We were the first, I think, todo that. And then we picked a project which he did not approve. He thought itwas going to be too difficult for us to do, and he wanted me to pick somethingelse, and I said, “No, I think we can do it.” So he called me into his office andhe said, “Okay, well, I’ll make a deal with you. The other guys will getwhatever grade I think they ought to get, but you either get an A+ or I flunkyou. I said, “Well, what a great deal!” You know, “Get the A+ ready!”So, we did it; it worked out fine, and then he asked me to be his assistant forthe following year, which was a fairly big deal. He picked one student out ofhis class to be his assistant. But I’d met Dave Packard by then, so I turnedDoriot down. And then years later he asked me to come back and runAmerican Research and Development [Corporation]. And I wasn’t able to dothat.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I guess you made a hit. Perkins: Oh yes. When I went back to Boston I would go and see him and take him todinner, or sometimes I would eat at his house. He was an extraordinary man,wonderful. He was, of course, the first venture capitalist in the United Statesof the new mold in high-tech. J.P. Morgan—there’s been risk capital aroundforever, but I would say Doriot was the first to do high-tech venture capital.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Meaning AR&D? Perkins: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did he bring AR&D in a lot when he was lecturing? Perkins: No, no, he did not. Everybody knew what he was doing because there was alot of publicity about it. But he did not. Unfortunately, at the time when he setup AR&D he couldn’t, he didn’t structure it [correctly] so that he personallydidn’t make any money on it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Really? Perkins: That was the fatal flaw there. It was a public company, and in those days youcouldn’t participate in the profits.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you think that might have been deliberate on his part? I mean notdeliberate in the sense that he didn’t want to make money, but rather therewere other things that he found more important. Perkins: No, I think he screwed up, and I think he really screwed up. He tried for yearsto restructure it in some way.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So with all this fame he ended up not making much money? Perkins: Well, he made money in stock options and stuff in the companies that theybacked, but AR&D itself only could pay him a salary.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All right, so you obviously liked this course and the way he gave it. But whathappened when you went back to the tried-and-true Harvard case-studysystem? Perkins: Ninety percent of Harvard is the case method, and Doriot is an exception.When I think of Harvard I think of Doriot. But what I learned at Harvard wasfrom the cases. I think it’s an excellent way to teach and an excellent way tolearn.Incidentally, I taught for a year at Stanford in the business school, years ago,where they also use the case method. The difference between Harvard andStanford is in some ways day and night because at Stanford, even though theyuse the case method, the professor at the last five, ten minutes of the periodgives the right answer, or gives the answer. “Okay, this what you should havesaid and this is what should have been done.” At Harvard, never, never; theprofessor never said, “This is the right answer.” If the discussion was goingcompletely crazy he would try to bring it back. But there was no right answer,which is the way the world is! There’s no right answer in any of these things.I found that great, and I was able to, I guess, read the cases, study them,participate in the discussion, and come to what I felt was what should be donefor the following reasons, without having all the data possible that you couldhave. So I found it easy to deal with the case method. I guess I didn’t know itat the time, but writing is fairly easy for me. So there was a lot of writtenanalysis of these cases, and I found it rather easy to do. So, yes, Harvard waspretty cool.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Presumably, other than Doriot, there were other personal connections that youmade? Perkins: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is that another thing Harvard provides to its graduates? Perkins: No.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So that was the end of that. Perkins: Well, I can remember the names of a couple other professors but that’s aboutit. No, Doriot was an entirely different kind of person.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All right, enough on Harvard? Can we go to Hewlett Packard? Perkins: Yes, because HP was really a big thing in my career. So I was working for acompetitor of HP called the General Radio Company in Cambridge during thesummer, between years at Harvard, and I was doing a little consulting forthem, making money during the school season as well. The project they gaveme over the summer was to test instruments being made by this companycalled Hewlett-Packard out in California. Both companies were competitors.General Radio made voltmeters, oscillators, various kinds of electronic testequipment. The Hewlett-Packard equipment cost about a third of what theGeneral Radio equipment cost, and it didn’t look as good, but it was relativelyinexpensive. So General Radio hired me to— They had an instrumentationlaboratory to see how accurate the Hewlett-Packard equipment was, and did itdo what it said it would do. In every case it did as well or better than thespecification had guaranteed, and it was better than the General Radioequivalent, more accurate, even though it was less expensive. So I was veryimpressed with this equipment.General Radio was a bigger company than Hewlett-Packard, but HewlettPackard was growing fast and giving General Radio a lot of trouble. So, in mysecond year at Harvard I thought I was going to need a job. So I wroteHewlett-Packard and I explained what I had been doing and asked if I couldbe interviewed for a job. So I heard back from Dave Packard. He said, “We’regoing to be in New York in a few weeks at the electrical engineersconvention. Please come down and see us and we’ll interview you.” So I did. Iarrived at the convention, and there was Dave Packard and Bill Hewlett. Ofcourse they were young men in those days, and they were personally settingup their booth, just the two of them, which was shocking. I mean, GeneralRadio executives would have never done that. So I was there and I helpedthem. And we were talking and putting it all together. By the time we had itall together Dave Packard said, “We’re going to make you an offer,” and acouple of weeks later I got an offer.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now, had they looked into you other than your letter? Perkins: Well, no, I don’t think so. In those days they didn’t even have a personneldepartment. So I never talked to anybody else. I had no thought ofinterviewing on Wall Street. It was anathema to me; that’s from Doriotprobably, but there’s just something about it. I never liked Wall Street.Anyway, so I got in my car and drove across the United States and startedwith Hewlett-Packard.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What was going on in your mind? You saw that their equipment was cheapand good, if not beautiful? Perkins: It wasn’t terrible looking; it wasn’t as luxurious-looking. The General Radiostuff was in varnished cases with black crackle, and it really looked great. Butinside it wasn’t any better. I was tremendously impressed by Dave Packardand Bill Hewlett from the two or three hours I spent with them in New York,helping them with the booth. It just was obvious to me if I could work forthese two people I would learn everything. And I liked them; they seemed tobe having fun; they were successful. I couldn’t see any negatives at all.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What did you think about going that far away? You were an East Coast boy. Perkins: Well at the time I figured I’ll give it a couple of years. I had already spent acouple of years traveling around the world working for Sperry Gyroscope, andI did think I would probably settle in the East because that’s where I grew upand everything. But I figured well, a couple years, why not? I’d never been toSan Francisco or Northern California. But I had some friends that had livedhere some years before. They were old friends of my family, and they justextolled the San Francisco Bay Area. I had this idea that San Francisco wasthe place, which of course it is, as we all know.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] We all agree. Perkins: So I got out here, and I was living in Palo Alto, and I loved it. Again, I don’twant to always talk to the book, but instead of starting off in management, Istarted off in the machine shop.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now that surprised me in reading your book. Here you were with a HarvardMBA. Was that really the way your education should have been used? Perkins: Well, yes, but it was a bit of a surprise. There were two problems. First of all,Hewlett-Packard was a very small company when I arrived. It was, I think,$25 million a year, the whole thing.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And maybe how many employees? Perkins: Growing fast, oh gosh, I don’t know—a few thousand. I’d have to think aboutthat, a few thousand. But, it didn’t feel like a small company; well it wasn’t asmall company. In those days $25 million a year was pretty good revenue. Butcompared to what finally happened, it was nothing, of course. And I thinkthey had hired one MBA before me, from Stanford, and the managers of thecompany were all engineers. There was a hostility on the part of the managersto the idea that you can go to a business school and learn how to manage andthen come in and manage. That’s just not right [they felt].Packard and Hewlett, they were geniuses of course. I think the first MBA theyhired was kind of an accountant. I was in a way the first MBA expected to runthings that they ever hired. Packard thought, we just have to deal with this. So,he said, “I want you to work in the machine shop for six months and learnhow to make a good product”—well, also the assembly lines, but mostly themachine shop. He didn’t say it, but what he meant is, let’s see how you getalong with the people.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So he was very aware of the stigma? Perkins: Yes, can you do this, in other words. So, I said fine. What else could I say? SoI did and it worked. I wasn’t a very good machinist.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you being paid as a machinist too? Perkins: No, I was being paid as an MBA, so I was a very highly paid machinist. But Iwas working as a machinist, period. I mean there was no other, nothing elsewas going on. I did it for several months, and then I got the call, “Well okay,now come on into the marketing department.” I worked for Noel Eldred whowas the original vice president of marketing for the company, and that’s sortof how I started. I had a lot of contact with Packard and Hewlett and NoelEldred and Noel Porter. These are the grand names from Hewlett-Packard,and I got to know them all very well.There was a fair amount of socializing that we did back then. Packard andHewlett had a ranch, still have it. You know, the company was small enough,and they were everywhere in evidence enough so that I was able to see howthey did it. They were brilliant entrepreneurs. I really think everything Ilearned about entrepreneurship, I learned from them. And they taught. Therewould be a lot of meetings where we’d review projects, and they wouldexplain to everybody, “This is what we’re going to do, and this is why we’redoing it, and this is what it means, and this is how it fits.” They were verydidactic and tutorial in almost a surprising way. They spent a lot of timeeducating their managers, much more than I had seen anywhere else or thatI’ve ever seen since, really. It was just tremendous for all of us. There’s awhole cadre of people of that era that— We just worshipped Hewlett andPackard, particularly Packard.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why do you say that? Perkins: Well, they were two very different, very complicated geniuses. Dave wasalways the boss. They had an amazing relationship between the two of them,which a lot of people have written about and speculated about and everything.But I honestly can’t say; I don’t know how they did it. Hewlett would followPackard, but it was very clear that he was also influencing Packard. So thingshappened between the two of them that—who knows? Packard would be theleader, but Hewlett was a big influence on Packard. That’s, I guess, a simpleway to say it. Packard had a violent temper and would get very angry veryquickly, and it could be very frightening. Except that, [chuckling] I don’tknow, maybe it’s arrogant for me to say it, but he didn’t scare me, and I’d justargue with him about whatever.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did he like that? Perkins: Well, he never said go away, and we’d thrash things out. Well, of course, he’sthe boss, and you have to use some common sense. But I never feltintimidated by him. Hewlett, on the other hand, was much more friendly andeasier with people, but I felt deep down was a tougher cookie. But anyway, Iworked for both of them directly for years.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you have the feeling that they kind of worked things out privatelytogether? Perkins: Absolutely, oh absolutely.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So they came in with a coordinated picture. Perkins: Absolutely. They never argued with each other—ever. I don’t remember asingle dispute. And they’d say, “This is not like at home where if mommywon’t do it daddy will. Uh, uh, this is it. Don’t try to play us.” So I worked forthat small company for a couple of years. I got very restless; I went intomanagement consulting for a year. I quit. And I went to work for Booz Allen& Hamilton.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You mean you were restless at HP? Perkins: Yes, yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why? With all of this good stuff happening? Perkins: Restlessness is the horror of my existence.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You’d just been there too long, regardless. Perkins: Yes, I wasn’t running the place, you know. Well, I had been there for twoyears, and I wasn’t the boss.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How old were you? Perkins: This is 1958 and 1959, so I was twenty-six, twenty-seven.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, you certainly wouldn’t be CEO of Hewlett-Packard. Perkins: Right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Does this say something about Tom Perkins? Perkins: Oh, sure. So I quit and went to work for a management consultant company,Booz Allen & Hamilton<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now, why them? Perkins: Well, they were the best. They had the best reputation. They paid a lot ofmoney. I mean I kind of doubled my salary with them from Hewlett-Packard.I hated it; it was a terrible mistake. For all kinds of reasons I didn’t like it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, give me a slight clue. Perkins: Well, I was in the San Francisco office; I think it was on Montgomery Streetright here in San Francisco, and it was a very small office. There were onlylike four individuals, a couple partners and a couple worker bees. And theywere bidding jobs, and the jobs were very small, like a week or two weeks’work to solve whatever problems somebody had. And it just wasn’t enoughtime to do it properly, and there was such a diversity of things. I was literallyjust traveling every day to get the data, and then write the report, and then onto the next job. I only stayed there for a year, and I must have had at least adozen or maybe fifteen jobs. Some were interesting but most were not, and Irealized I could never make a career of this. I had made a huge mistake.So I contacted Packard, and said, “Can I come back?” And he said, “Yes, youcan. But Bill and I have just invested in a venture called Optics Technology.They’re looking for a guy to run the commercial side of it and maybe thatwould appeal to you. Maybe you should take a look at that.” It sounded goodto me, so I flew back to Chicago and met Narinder [Singh] Kapany, who has aPhD in optics and allegedly invented fiber optics.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why allegedly? Perkins: Well, he is a very controversial person—and there are those who would say hestole all of the ideas. I’m not saying that, but there are those that will.Anyway, that’s when I met Don [Donald L.] Lucas. So the venture money wascoming in from Draper, Gaither & Anderson, which I’m sure you knowabout—one of the first VC [venture capital] outfits here in Palo Alto. DonLucas was quarterbacking Optics Technology. I did it, and again my salarydropped from twice HP to about half HP, but I got stock in the company. So ifthey made it, I’d make a lot of money.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And you were thinking that? I mean, was that one of the appeals? Perkins: Yes, oh yes, yes. By then I thought I wanted to make some money. It turnedout Narinder Kapany and I just detested each other, I mean just to this day.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It was a personality clash? Or was it more than that? Perkins: It was everything. Kapany in my opinion was a phony. I don’t think he hadthe scientific credentials he claimed, and he certainly didn’t have themanagement skills he claimed. He was a fraud. A very attractive, charmingguy, a Sikh, you know, with a turban and beard, big booming personality, abig booming laugh, a charming person. He charmed a lot of money out ofinvestors, but there was really nothing behind it, and just a handful of littlewidgets and stuff, mostly that I had put together.So Narinder and I just simply battled for four years. I stuck it out for fouryears; it was quite a long time. This is a long story, but I finally quit. I justcouldn’t stand it, because I felt it was doomed. I quit at the time when thestock market was really hot, so they were able to take Optics Technologypublic and the stock went up. I had to give all my stock back; I didn’t make apenny on it. And then about a year later, it all crashed, and there was nothingleft. I was right. But frequently I am right but too early in my timing. Soanyway, I once again called Dave Packard and said, “Can I come back?” Hesaid, “Sure.” So, I came back and in the meanwhile—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Excuse me, but would that flexibility happen today? What was this, thesecond time you asked to come back? Perkins: Yes, I quit Hewlett-Packard four times! [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: In more ways than one you’re indebted to HP. Perkins: Well, twice as a kid and then two as—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I think we have to give Tom Perkins some credit here. I’m sure theywould not have accepted any Joe Blow. Perkins: No, I don’t think they would have either. I think Packard saw in me someonelike himself: very hard-driving, highly motivated, a maybe intelligententrepreneur with a lot of skills. I think he saw that, and he was happy to bringme back into the fold. But the company had grown very rapidly during thefour and a half, almost five years. During that period, it had gone from $30-$40 million to probably $500 million. So it was getting to be a pretty bigcompany. And it had gone from a couple of divisions to, I think, seventeendivisions. Now it had a personnel department, and it had all the things that youwould expect it to have. But it was still a very entrepreneurial company.Hewlett decided he wanted to have a centralized research department, becausethey had been doing all of their engineering development division by divisionscattered around the country. They set up the divisions near universities sothat they could have that great academic/industrial link.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now was that somewhat unique? Perkins: Yes. That was, I think, Packard’s idea, or maybe it was Hewlett’s idea—Idon’t know. They did it all over the place. They did it in Colorado, in Oregon,back East, always a university link. They invented that in a way. It’s no longerso appropriate for other complicated reasons, but at the time it was brilliant,absolutely brilliant.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You mean it’s no longer appropriate for that particular type of industry? Perkins: Let me withdraw that. I think it still works; it just isn’t probably as importantnow as it used to be because there’s more centralization now.What year is this? This is probably 1962 or 1963, something like that. So,Hewlett wanted to set up HP Laboratories, Hewlett-Packard Laboratories, andhe put in charge of it, Dr. Bernard Oliver. I use the word genius a lot, butBarney Oliver was, is, was absolutely a genius, but the least practical personyou would ever meet. So Hewlett felt that Barney should have anadministrative backup to help him do all this stuff. So that was me. I helpedBarney hire people, get space, do budgets, set up project managementprocedures, all the infrastructure that you would need for a laboratory. It was apretty big success.We got it all set up, and then Hewlett and Packard both used it to trigger newinitiatives for the company. They were brilliant at this. Hewlett used HP Labsto develop the calculators and the handheld calculators, and Packard used it todevelop the computer, the Hewlett-Packard computer. So these wereimportant diversifications, and they were both immensely successful, thatcouldn’t have been done any other way, I think. So I was like in the machineshop boiler room doing all of that stuff with them, for them, deeply involvedin it all. I’m kind of jumping ahead. So I did that for a couple of—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: May I ask you something? I may be misinterpreting, but it seems to me thatyou’re taking more and more leave of your science background, that you’regetting much more into administration/business. Perkins: Well, sure, but remember this is all high-tech stuff.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right. So you’ve got to do both. Perkins: Yes. So I would say no. If anything I was learning more about technology, notless.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Okay. But you’re not doing it? Perkins: No. I’m not doing circuit boards, no. But I understood it all, and I could hangin there.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, you had to, didn’t you? Perkins: Yes, sure.Now there are two things that happen here more or less at the same time. I didthe University Labs and the computer thing, and this is the most difficult thingto explain because I don’t think you could conceivably do both now, and itwas pretty much unheard of even then.Okay, so I have come back to Hewlett-Packard; I am now administrativemanager of the research labs. One morning I had this idea on how to make alaser really practical. Lasers had been invented and existed, but they were veryexpensive, cumbersome, difficult to operate, etc. I don’t know if it was in theshower or wherever, but I got this idea of how to make a laser like a lightbulb. It would be cheap—it either worked or you threw it away. It would berugged, foolproof—all you had to do was connect it to the electricity and itwould work.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because existing ones were not foolproof. Perkins: Elaborate laboratory pieces of equipment. No, there wasn’t much of a marketfor a laser other than as a curiosity. But that turned out— That was a ratherbig market, because every university in the world wanted to have a laser, andevery junior college and even high schools.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But you didn’t know that at that time? Perkins: No, I had a sense that that would be half true. I also had a sense that therewere a lot of things you could do with those lasers if you could have apractical one. Well, I discussed this with a guy named Dick Jaenicke, whoworked for me at Optics Technology, and who was still at Optics Technology.We kicked it around and we decided yes, this could be done, and yes, it wouldwork.So I decided I wanted to start a venture to make lasers. But having quitHewlett-Packard foolishly once before, I didn’t want to quit Hewlett-Packardagain. So I went to Dave Packard—and this is absolutely extraordinary—and Ishowed him my invention. I’d sketched on a piece of paper my idea and howit would work. And I had total trust in him that he wasn’t going to steal it, andof course he would understand it. I said, “Dave, I really want to do this, and Ican do it on weekends. I don’t want to quit Hewlett-Packard, but I wouldreally like to try this.” And astonishingly he said, “Okay, just don’t let it get inthe way.” Now, I can’t think of anybody else in America that would have said“Yes, okay.” They would have said, “No, you’ve either got to work for me ordo this on your own.” And then he would have probably said, “Besides, itisn’t going to work, and you’ll run out of money,” and all this stuff, all thenegatives—none of that from Packard.So then I persuaded my wife [Gerd Thune-Ellefsen Perkins] to let me take ourlife savings, which was like $15,000, which we had been saving to buy ahouse, and to put it into financing the development of this tube. I called it alaser tube; in fact, I called it the Lasertron, to make it sound like a klystron ora magnetron, to give it a little marketing pizzazz. I guess we’ve got time toexplain how I did it.[End Audio File 1] Perkins: The first thing, and I suppose the most important for me, was the laser, and inorder to pull it off with only $15,000 of capital I had to figure out some waysto do it very inexpensively. I had an acquaintance that was a glass blower overin Berkeley on University Avenue. So I made a deal with him that I’d givehim a third of the company if he would make the first 100 tubes—do all thedevelopment and make the first 100 tubes. And then I gave Dick Jaenicke, thisguy that worked for me at Optics Technology, a third of the company to workthere and make it happen. I kept a third of the company and became chairmanand put in the money, and it worked.After a few false starts, the invention worked and we started to make theselasers, and the company was very successful. We applied the laser to not justscientific applications, which was our entrée. We made a little kit so youcould make holograms, which were a big thing in those days, and we sold thelaser and the kit and all that. We sold a lot of them to the university andcollege market.But then we had—I didn’t have, but a guy that worked there had—the idea oflaying sewer pipe with this laser, using it to line up the angles that you need,because sewer pipe has to go in straight line. If it goes like that [indicating aturn] you have a big problem. In the construction industry, it’s a big dealbecause you had to survey. You had a surveying crew to go over hill and daleand determine how deep the trenches had to be dug and all of that. With ourlaser you just dig a hole. The laser was foolproof; it would work under water;you could run it from a battery. You just shine the light down the trench andput a little plastic target at the end of the pipe, and if the red dot is in themiddle of the plastic target, you know it is straight, and you just keep going.So you could eliminate the whole surveying crew. And we sold the thing for, Ithink, $3,000, and our cost was, I don’t know, very little—$300, maybe $200.The contractors could pay for our laser on their first job, so we just sold thosethings. We started making money hand over fist.I’m running quickly through this, and I’m going to get back to what I wasdoing at Hewlett-Packard. But the laser company was becoming a big success.We had several hundred employees, and it had reached the point where Ieither had to go work there myself, because it was making a lot of money forme—and Dick. I bought out the third partner along the way, so it was a prettygood deal.I explored taking it public with Hambrecht and Quist, which was a hotinvestment bank outfit in San Francisco in those days. Bill [William R.]Hambrecht is still around; George Quist unfortunately died. And George Quistsaid, “No, no, no, you don’t want to do that. What you want to do is mergethis thing into Spectra-Physics. We’ve taken Spectra-Physics public, and it’sgot everything, but they don’t make any money. You guys make the money;we could just put these things together. You’ll end up owing most of SpectraPhysics, and you will get immediate liquidity, and you don’t have to quitHewlett-Packard.” So that’s what I did.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You worked at Hewlett-Packard five days a week and at UniversityLaboratories only on weekends? Perkins: Nights and weekends, yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you must have had good people. Perkins: Yes, sure we did. Dick Jaenicke was very good. When we sold it, I think hewas only twenty-three or twenty-four years old, and he retired. [chuckling]And he’s never worked since.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I notice that you didn’t retire.20 Perkins: No, no.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But you could have, I’m assuming. Perkins: I could have; I could have retired. I didn’t want to.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You made a lot of money? Perkins: Yes, yes, for those days, you know; nothing by current standards. But, youknow, a few million dollars back in the sixties was a lot of money.Okay, so Packard knew what I was doing, but he didn’t pay much attention toit. He knew that my company was successful, but he didn’t pay muchattention to it. So when I sold the company to Spectra-Physics, merged it intoSpectra-Physics, it was in the paper. He came roaring into my office, and Ithought oh my God, he is just going to kill me. Just the reverse. He justthought it was the greatest thing because it had never interfered with HewlettPackard at all. He just thought it was wonderful, what I had done. Interesting.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But on the other hand, it was right down his line. Perkins: I was his boy; I was doing what he did way back.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And in a field that he knew all about. Perkins: Well, he didn’t know about optics, but he knew it was technology.So meanwhile, at Hewlett-Packard, I’m running the research laboratory—notrunning it; I’m the administrative manager of it. But except for the technicaldecisions I was kind of running it. And the calculator had been an enormoussuccess, and that was Hewlett’s baby, and then Packard wanted to have acomputer to use to control Hewlett-Packard instruments. So the idea wasobvious; you would have a computer, and you could do tests, automatedtesting of things, and you could sell these into the military market, and soforth, which was a big market for HP in those days.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now was that a new idea? Perkins: New idea— Well, computers, of course, existed. Digital Equipment had itscomputer, and IBM had a bigger computer, but HP did not invent thecomputer.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I know that. Perkins: But they made a very, very good computer because they built the computer toHP’s standards for vibration and temperature and humidity. It was rugged,whereas the Digital Equipment and IBM computers were not.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What about cost? Perkins: Well, it was competitively priced. It was okay. It was not any cheaper, but itwas not any more either. So the computer was invented, and then it wastransferred down into the Palo Alto division to be manufactured and sold. Andthe Palo Alto division was obviously in Palo Alto; it was down at Page Milland El Camino basically. The rest of the company was up on the hill in theStanford Park, and that’s where the research laboratories were.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: The location is not incidental, is it? I imagine the division fed into thecomputer science at Stanford, right? Perkins: Not in those days.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So it could have been anywhere? Perkins: It could have been anywhere. But unfortunately what happened was—and I’vetried to explain this in my book, and I don’t how interesting it is toanybody—but the computer transformed Hewlett-Packard Company, totally.And I was lucky enough to be on the cutting edge of that. What happened isthey transferred the computer down to this Palo Alto division, and it had adivision manager and a sales manager, and manufacturing—everything. Andthey didn’t sell a single computer for twelve months, not one, not one.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] Was your heart in your stomach? Perkins: I had nothing to do with this. I was still up in the research lab; it wasn’t myproblem, wasn’t my problem.Packard, who had a violent temper, finally called a meeting to find out why,what’s wrong? So all the engineers, I mean there must have been twenty orthirty engineers, and a bunch of other people. I was invited and I went. Well,you can imagine, all the engineers had technical reasons: it doesn’t haveenough index or the I/O speed and the memory, and the blabeddy-jabeddy.And it went on for hours, and Packard is just getting madder and madder andmadder, because he’s saying, “Well, how could we have made all of thesemistakes?” And I didn’t say anything, and finally he said, “Well, Tom, whatdo you think?” And I said, “Dave when everything else fails, try selling. Ithink the salesmen are terrified of the computer.” And he didn’t pick up on it.He just said, “Grrrraaa,” you know, and went on.The next day—I didn’t think anything further about it—he came by my desk,and he said, “What do you mean? What did you say?” And I said, “Well,Dave, I don’t know anything about this computer. It’s a highly specializedthing. The only people that understand it are the guys that invented it. But Iknow a little more about it than the salesmen do, and I know I would have ahell of a time selling this because I would make a fool of myself trying to sellthis product to somebody that knows anything about computers. And thesalesmen can make their quota just selling the stuff they have always beenselling, and they just don’t want to touch it. Again he didn’t say anything, buthe heard me, and he disappeared.So two weeks later I get a call that both Hewlett and Packard want to havelunch with me at their club, the Palo Alto Club, which I had never been to.This is a pretty big deal. And meanwhile the laser company was booming, andI thought maybe they were upset about the laser; I didn’t know what it was.Anyway, so we went and we had the lunch, and at the end of the lunch—we’dbeen talking a little bit but not too much about the computer—Packard said,“Okay, wise guy, it’s your problem, take it on.”Well, I had been transferred from the labs to be the marketing manager of thePalo Alto division. I got there, and of course there were a lot of people; it wasa big division. I was absolutely convinced that I was correct and that we didn’thave to change the product in any way. But we had to change absolutelyeverything about the marketing, everything. We had to have specialists thatunderstood the computer; we had to promote it in the ways that you canpromote computers; we had to have OEM [original equipment manufacturer]discounts, things that the Hewlett- Packard Company never had had.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What’s an OEM discount? Perkins: Original equipment manufacturer. I’ll get into this, don’t worry. I’m spendinga lot of time on this Hewlett-Packard thing because it is the cornerstone of myventure capital career.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That’s fine. Perkins: So that’s why it’s worth talking about. Okay, the fundamental problem wasthat Hewlett-Packard had started by using manufacturer’s representativesaround the world who did not work for the company; they worked on acommission. And then along the way, shortly after I came back to thecompany to go into the research labs, Dave and Bill began to acquire thesemanufacturer’s reps, and they bought them, and then they became full-timeHewlett-Packard salesmen. But that was just a change in the ownership; theystill were behaving the same way.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So in other words they weren’t highly trained about HP products. Perkins: Well—yes, they knew HP products. They sold HP, Varian, and two or threeother lines, but HP was becoming most of their business.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, I see. So it wasn’t just exclusively HP? Perkins: No. They represented, typically, Varian Associates, and then different oneshad other lines. But as the years flowed, HP was becoming like 80 percent oftheir business. So it had to happen. I mean, they were acquired, and theyneeded to be acquired, and they were happy to be acquired, and everybodymade money, and all that. But nothing changed; every Hewlett-Packardsalesman sold every Hewlett-Packard product. There was a catalog, and therewas no specialization of any kind. So this computer comes along which is ahighly specialized thing; it’s a big deal; it takes a long time to understand allthis stuff. Nobody had trained anybody; there was nothing in place to facilitatethe salesmen to deal with this thing. I basically said to Packard, “I have prettymuch got to create my own sales force.” And he went, “Grrr, grrr, grr.” So Iwent to Noel Eldred, who was the vice president of marketing, who only hadtwo years to go before he retired, and he said, “No way, NO WAY.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because he would lose control? Perkins: He would lose control. Eldred said, “There are seventeen divisions; you arejust one. They all want their own sales forces. I am not going to—” And helooked me right in the eye—and he liked me! He said, “Tom, I am not goingto let you make my life a misery. You know? No.” I had to go back toPackard. This is not good business practice to go around your boss [Eldred],and all that stuff. So, I had to do that.I got permission to start hiring salesmen away from Digital Equipmentbecause they understood this stuff. And so I hired eight of them initially andscattered them around the United States, brought them all back, trained themon our product, got them back into the field. And immediately the businesstook off. I mean just like that! Once the salesmen realized it’s a good productand all we need is one of these specialists to help us, they started to sell themlike crazy. So the business grew. It’s hard to describe how fast it grew. It wascompounding at 30 to 50 percent a quarter, I mean, just like that. So westarted hiring, growing, everything.The salesmen were the crucial thing. But I had to change the advertising, thetradeshow promotion, the public relations, the way we manufactured—and theway we treated our engineers. We had a lot of software engineers, and theydidn’t like to wear shoes. So I bought carpet for them, and they didn’t have towear shoes. Well this, this just upset the rest of the company. I mean, it’sridiculous and hard to even describe how upsetting I was—Tom Perkins—tothat whole organization.My boss, who was the manager of the Palo Alto division, had basically anervous breakdown, I think because of me. Because it was organized chaos,and he just couldn’t do it. So Packard said, “Well all right, you run it.” So Ibecame the division manager, and the division went from nothing, or verysmall, to the largest division in the company in about two-and-a-half to threeyears. And everything was different about it: our margins, our marketingexpense, R&D expense; it didn’t look like any of the other divisions. Bookshave been written about how marvelous Hewlett-Packard is, and managementby-walking-around, and all that stuff. I’m not denigrating that. Dave and Billhad seventeen divisions, but they were all the same; they were all the samebusiness—no difference really between voltmeters and microwaves and thatstuff. So, they could manage it by just looking at ratios. You’re supposed tospend 15 percent on engineering, 5 percent on marketing, or whatever,whatever. But here’s a division, the computer division—everything isdifferent. No relationship.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, hadn’t you created a startup within a corporation? Perkins: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And that didn’t fit? Perkins: It didn’t fit. So there were constant battles. Now I had really a greatrelationship with Hewlett and Packard, and I had a great relationship witheverybody that worked for me in the division, and they are all famous. Bill[William H.] Davidow, and Bill [William L.] Abbott, and Roy [L.] Clay, allthese guys that have subsequently done great things in Silicon Valley. Thatwas great, but my relationship with my fellow division managers wasabsolutely awful. They hated me; they just hated me!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, they probably hated you not only because you were doing thingsdifferently, but because you were doing it so well. Perkins: Well, and I was getting a lot of publicity.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, you were making money, too. Perkins: Making money; we were very profitable, the whole thing. But when I say theyhated me, when the idea of my coming onto the Hewlett-Packard board firstcame up, a couple of them came out of retirement to go to the company andsay, “Don’t ever do that; it would be a catastrophe.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Really. So it wasn’t just a passing animosity. Perkins: No, they really hated me; they really hated me. There were just endlessclashes, and there were some famous battles between Packard and myself. Irealized that we could not only use our computer in our instrument systems,but we could use them in other people’s instruments and products, and so on.But in order to do that you have to sell it at a discounted price so that they canmake the margin when they resell it, and this is called the OEM, originalequipment manufacturer. It’s a margin thing.The company never discounted anything. If you bought one voltmeter it was$400; if you bought 4,000 voltmeters, each one was $400, that’s it. Period.And Packard genuinely believed that it was illegal to have discounts, and insome ways it is, that you have to do it in special ways. But anyway, we had tohave these discounts in order to sell lots of computers.We had a famous meeting where I proposed the whole thing, and Packard justabsolutely got furious, and he just said, “NO.” He slammed the table, and hegot up, and he stormed out of the room. I’m sitting there, and Hewlett said,“Well, Tom, what are you going to do?” But Hewlett was no fool; Hewlettknew I was right. And I said, “Bill, I’ll be back.” So I got all of the expertopinion, legal advice, and everything, and I went back two weeks later, put itall down in front of Dave, and he started to go through it, and he said, “Yes,yes, yes.” Done. [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: He’d been thinking about it! Perkins: Well, I think why I liked him so much is that even though he could get very,very angry, it wasn’t personal. You know? I was doing it for—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And he didn’t hold it. Perkins: No, he didn’t hold it. There was another famous one where we developed thefirst time-sharing system, which was a technology that has sort of come andgone. But the idea was a central computer hosting a large number of dumbterminals. You know, the idea disappeared, and then it came back, so it’s stillaround, time-sharing computers. But anyway, we made one, and it was— Ithink we sold it for about $100,000, and it would support, as I remember,thirty teletype machines in those days, you know, these cranking, out-punch,paper-tape machines. But it was pretty good, and we started to sell quite a fewof those, and they competed with IBM. The rest of the company sold to IBM.IBM was one of the largest customers for Hewlett-Packard instruments. So theother division managers were just having a fit, and they went to Noel Eldred,the vice president, and said, “You’ve got to stop Perkins! He’s going todestroy our business with IBM.” [chuckling] Which was nonsense; it wouldn’thave mattered, but anyway. So they deputized Packard to come down and dealwith me. He came in; you know the usual, “Grrrrr.” And I said, “Well, Dave,first of all, I think the parts of IBM that are buying my computers, ourcomputers, don’t have any idea about the rest of Hewlett-Packard.” And Isaid, “Do you want to see how we’re actually doing in this business?” Well,so I show him the numbers, Well, we were making 70 to 75 percent margins.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It’s hard to argue with that. Perkins: It’s unbelievable. And we’d sold millions, a few million dollars—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And he didn’t know that? Perkins: No, he didn’t know that in that detail, no. I showed him the data, he said,“Well, I think it’s all right to keep continuing.” [laughter] So we had this greatthing. So I’m running the largest division of the company pretty soon.Then Packard went back to Washington to be the Deputy Director of Defense.Hewlett is now running the company, and Hewlett had never run anything.The company is growing very fast; the computers are growing very fast, andthere were problems. There were budgets and getting resources and peopleand space. I mean, we needed a lot of physical space because in those days wemade everything under one roof; we didn’t sub it out the way you do now. Wehad these management meetings where everybody would be there, and I wasreally pretty vocal and complaining that we weren’t running the place right.After about six months of Packard being gone, roughly six months, Hewlettinvited me up, and I honestly thought he was going to fire me,because I hadbeen pretty outspoken. I also had my laser company, and I had bought aFerrari, and I had all— There were plenty of reasons to fire me. [chuckling]And Hewlett said basically, “You don’t have to do this. If you want to keepyour computer division, that’s fine. But if you’d like it, I would like you tocome up here and take the office next to mine and help me run this place.”And I said, “Well, what would I do? I mean, you’re running it.” And he said,“Well, it would be a staff job, but any ideas you’ve got that are good, we’lldo.” And I said, “Well, what would my title be?” And he said, “I don’t haveany idea; you invent one.” So, I did. I called myself Director of CorporateDevelopment.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now why did you do it? Perkins: Why did I do it? Because— Well, the challenge. [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I should have known! Perkins: I mean how exciting, right? By this time the company was $700 million or so.It was pretty clear it was going to be a giant company, but it wasn’t going toget there doing it the way we were doing it. I think Packard had taken thecompany as far as he could take it with his seat-of-the-pants, hands-on style.Hewlett was much more hypothetical, theoretical, willing to look intoalternative structures and different ways of doing things.I talked a bit about it in the book [Valley Boy], but I reorganized the companythanks to the old Boston Consulting Group, which was a new company at thattime. They were sort of the first really good management consultants—notlike Booz Allen & Hamilton—on matters of strategy and growth and marketsand so forth. They had a free seminar on how their whole scheme worked,back in Boston. I went back; it was a two-day thing, and in two days I got it.[chuckling] But I didn’t need to hire them. I came back, and I explained it allto Hewlett and implemented, and he said, “Yes.” The whole essence of it isbased upon investments in terms of market share, and so forth. Anyway, wereorganized the company, and that’s what we did.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now, was this all cutting edge? Perkins: Well, yes and no. I mean, Boston Consulting existed. Their first big client inAmerica was Texas Instruments. They helped Texas Instruments become thebig deal that it did become, and I would say Hewlett-Packard was the second.But they had nothing to do with it; I mean I stole their ideas—which theyinvited me to steal. And so we put that in place, and I think it’s fair to say thatif we hadn’t done that Hewlett Packard would have never gotten into themulti-billions the way it has, and I was pretty proud of that. So I did that fortwo or three years, and then Packard came back and— Well, two things: firstof all he did not like a lot of what I had done. I think incorrectly, his attitudewas, all this market-share stuff; you just make the best product, and if it’s anygood you’ll get the market share. Well, it’s not quite that simple, you know?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You were going against his model. Perkins: I was going against his model. Hewlett liked it, but Packard took over thecompany again. But it had gone so far that it never got changed back. So Ikind of won the battle. They liked me very much, but Packard said, “Look, Iam going to do what you’ve been doing, and so we’ll find another division foryou to run.” But I knew that because the computer division had already beengiven to somebody else, they couldn’t give it back to me. And I knew the onlydivisions that probably needed a new manager were in Colorado or back East,and I didn’t want to go there. So I came in the next morning and said, “Thankyou, thank you, thank you, but I’m going to go into the venture capitalbusiness.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now, had you just dreamed that up? Perkins: No, no, I had been kicking it around. But the trigger was Packard returning. Ihad talked to Doriot; this is before I became Hewlett’s assistant and while Iwas still running the computer division. He wanted me to come back and runAR&D. And I looked at it pretty hard, but there was no way to restructureAR&D to make it financially viable for me. So I could have had the glory ofrunning it, but I wouldn’t have made much money. I talked to him at lengthabout that, and I turned it down. In fact, it never did get restructured; it gotsold to Textron. Doriot never solved the problem, so he sold the whole thingand did not make any money on it. So I had flirted around with that, and I hadtalked to Bill Davidow, who subsequently became a venture capitalist, and aguy named Jack McKittrick, who also did, about maybe doing something. ButI didn’t.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Doing something, but not venture capital? Perkins: Yes, venture capital. Setting up a venture capital fund. But a whole mixture ofthings [for my not doing venture capital right away]. The challenge ofworking for Hewlett came, and I wanted to do that instead. I’m glad I didthat— Well, it speaks for itself, I mean, it was a pretty good job. So then I quitfor the second time, and I met Kleiner, and the rest we need to talk about.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It’s getting close to two. It’s okay with me if we start Kleiner Perkins. Perkins: Well, let’s start on it because who knows— I’ve got a doctor’s appointment atthree o’clock, so we can’t go too far.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How did you meet Eugene Kleiner? Perkins: I had been playing around with the idea of venture capital, and I realized that Ihad been a venture capitalist in the whole University Labs thing. I neverworked there, but I put up the money, and I managed it very successfully.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You put up the money, but not entirely, did you? Perkins: No, I put up all the initial money, and then we raised venture capital later.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Don’t I remember that Packard invested? Perkins: No, they didn’t invest in that. But John [A.] Young and some other managersfrom Hewlett-Packard [did]; some of the managers at Hewlett-Packard had aninvestment club. I raised money from three sources: the HP club, Sutter Hill[Ventures], and a small brokerage outfit called Davis, Skaggs. They are nolonger around, and they had a little venture pool.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you do this in the traditional way, or what became the traditional way?Going around and making presentations and all that formal stuff? Perkins: Yes, yes, but it was pretty easy. First of all, there was a buyer’s stampede.University Labs was very profitable, and I was very successful running theHewlett-Packard division. This was not too hard a decision to invest. So Iraised, I think, only $200,000, and I got a good valuation on University Labs,and that was it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: This is the mid-sixties?30 Perkins: Mid-sixties, yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So there’s not much venture capital with a capital VC? Perkins: No, no, this is really early days. Let’s just talk about that. At that time, SutterHill— Draper, Gaither & Anderson had shut down by then; they were gone.So Sutter Hill existed, Bryan and Edwards existed, Pitch Johnson was around,but very small.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And only his own money? Perkins: And only his own money. And Davis & Rock. But I had met Arthur.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Mr. Perkins is looking at a list of early venture capital firms. Perkins: [commenting on list] I think Page Mill Associates is the Hewlett-Packardinvestment club. Davis & Rock, Draper and Johnson, Sutter Hill. Fireman’sFund is Reid Dennis. Bessemer is New York; Hambrecht and Quist, yes; DonLucas; Rock. This was before Mayfield; it was Davis & Rock. That’s beforeMayfield was set up. Anyway, yes, I know all these people.[puts list down]So I really only needed to go to three people, and I got them all. And it wasreally, I remember, very funny. At the Page Mill Associates, which was theHewlett-Packard investment thing, I was going to lunch with John Young. Wewere very good friends, we still are— He became president of HewlettPackard. And John says, “You know, our club heard about this hot laser deal;it’s backed by really big money from back East.” [laughter] And I said, “John,no. You’re looking at it!” And we laughed. And they all made a lot of money.So everybody was happy; everybody was happy. I remember John Atalla said,“Tom, are you going to make me rich?” And I said, “John, I’ll make you richin experience.” He said, “No, no, no, no.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I want the hard cash. Perkins: I want the money; I want the green.So when I said okay, I am going to become a venture capitalist, I had alreadybeen very successful at HP, and I had already made millions in sort-of venturecapital. And so I had a pretty good resumé. I had talked to a friend, anacquaintance, Peter [O.] Crisp, who managed the Rockefeller familyinvestment portfolio for high-risk stuff back in New York. I forget how I methim, but I met him. And I told him, “I’m flirting around with venture capital,and would you be interested?” And he said, “Yes, we would. I think I couldput probably a million dollars of the Rockefeller University endowment intoyour fund, if you set up a fund.” In those days that was a lot of money,because they managed the Rockefeller endowment. So this wasn’t written oranything, it was just we probably could do that. So I sort of had a million, butI figured I needed $5 or $6 million, and I would put in some of my ownmoney, but not all of it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now Kleiner hasn’t appeared yet? Perkins: No. So I go to— There was an investment banking outfit, Robertson, Colman,Siebel, and Weisel—they are gone too— But Sandy [Sanford R.]Robertson—I don’t want to sound immodest—but Sandy identified me as asuperstar when I was still running the HP thing. He had in mind hiring me todo something somehow that he could make some money on. So we were sortof friends, and I went to him and said, “I’ve decided I’m going to do venturecapital. Can you help me raise the money? I’ve already got a million from theRockefeller family.” He said, “Great, yes, I can help you, but you’ve got tomeet Eugene Kleiner. He’s just like you; he’s doing the exactly the samething. He wants me to help him also, and he has got some money from theHillman family, and you guys should just meet each other.” And, oh—okay.[deep sigh]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] If you say so. Perkins: Yes—whatever. And Kleiner, I subsequently learned, had exactly the samereaction—whatever. So we agreed to call each other. We agreed to meet atRickey’s down on El Camino in Palo Alto for breakfast. And we each thoughtit’d be a twenty-minute breakfast. So we meet; we couldn’t have been moredifferent in every—every way. Eugene was ten years older than myself. Hewas Viennese with a rich Viennese accent, sort of portly, very quiet, but verybright, very successful—and we were similar. He had been running alldepartments, except research, for Fairchild Semiconductor. He had started,then, a company in the education machine business, which wasn’t too great.But he sold it to Raytheon, and he made a bunch of money. He was a limitedpartner of Davis & Rock, but this was before they really had done a lot.Anyway, he was very impressive. So we talked all morning; we talkedthrough lunch; we went back to my house and kicked it around the rest of theday.We got together the next day, and we decided yes—yes. And so I wrote theoriginal business plan for Kleiner Perkins. We decided to call it KleinerPerkins instead of God knows what else, which I think was a very gooddecision, incidentally. We kicked around other names, like Pantechnic orsomething—I don’t know. Anyway, I remember saying to Eugene, “Look, ifwe’re not proud enough of it to put our names on, what are we doing? And hesaid, “You’re right.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It may not have harmed to have your names on it. Perkins: Well, who knows? We weren’t famous, but we were sort of getting there.Anyway, so he had $4 million committed from the Hillman family who he hadmet through—how did he meet them? I think through Davis & Rock, but I’mnot sure about that—yes, through Tommy Davis.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And that was family money? Perkins: Yes, the Hillmans are enormously wealthy and very, very low profile. Theyare multi-billionaires. Henry Hillman’s father— Henry is still alive; he’s in hishigh eighties now. His father was one of the original robber barons, you know,coal, barges, steel—Pittsburgh. And Henry inherited, I don’t know, $50million in 1940, or something like that, and he has just multiplied it forever.So the Rockefellers said, “Yes, whatever, that’s fine. You and Kleiner gettogether.” But I had to go back and meet Henry, because— You know. Wegot along very well at that meeting, and he said, “Okay, I want to take half ofyour fund. So you want to raise $10 million, I want $5 million.” And I said,“Gee Henry, that’s just wonderful, why do you want that?” And he said, “Soyou’ll return my phone calls.” [laughter] So we had Henry’s $4 million, my$1 million, so we had five. It was almost impossible for us to raise any moremoney. It was extremely difficult.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you have a figure in mind? Perkins: $10 million.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you just pull that figure out of the air?million. And we picked up a couple of insurance companies in Wisconsin, andhere and there. No significant money from New York. No real significantmoney from Silicon Valley or Northern California. We decided that it’s justgoing to take us too long to get to the $10 million. Let’s close with whatwe’ve got and get on with it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How long had it been? Perkins: Oh, it had been three months. I mean it was pretty fast, not very long. But, wesort of got the easy money immediately, and then, this is going to take—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And then it got difficult. Was the economy playing into this? The oil crisiswas coming the next year [1973]. Perkins: Yes, there were various crises. The stock market was in one of its swoonsthen, but not as bad as it later got. But the short-term stock market alwaysinfluences the long-term decision. It shouldn’t, but it does. So we had thoseproblems. But at $8 million we had the largest fund in the world. The largestfund in the world, and everybody said it’s far too large, and you’ll neverinvest that much money. And they were right. We only invested $4 millionout of that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is that so? Perkins: We gave the rest of it back.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why don’t you tell me what those companies were. Perkins: Well, before I do that, let me tell you what was different about Kleiner &Perkins then. It was different at the time; it’s still in a way different; and weknew enough about it to know that it was different. I wish I could find thatoriginal business plan.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, don’t ever let anything happen to it. Perkins: I don’t know where it is, but it exists. But it was really very interesting. If youread it now, even after all these decades— We knew what we wanted to do,and we said we were going to do it, and we did it. We distinguished ourselvesright from the beginning by saying: We are not investors. We’re not WallStreet, stock-picker, investor people. We are entrepreneurs ourselves, and wewill work with entrepreneurs in an entrepreneurial way. We will be deeplyinvolved in what they are doing. We will be in it up to our elbows. This is adifferent kind of venture capital, and we will “Make It Happen.” I rememberone of the chapter heading in the business plan was “Making It Happen.”So we drew upon my experience at the University Labs, Eugene’s experiencein what he’d done—and we had done that, and really nobody else. I mean, youlook at Arthur Rock or Bill Draper, Don Lucas. They’d just put the money in,basically, and they’d maybe be on the board.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And Pitch Johnson too? Perkins: Well, Pitch has deserved pride in his ability to work with management. Healways talked about how he was a foreman in a steel mill and all that. ButPitch was operating on such a small scale in those days that he wasn’t a factor.But I would say Pitch was closer to us than anybody else. But Pitch had neverdone what Eugene and I had done. I mean, he was a foreman in a steel mill; hehad never started a venture. So we really had done it. So that was one keything.The second key thing, and I honestly think this is the key contribution thatTom Perkins has made to the American venture capital industry: I cleaned itup. Well, what do I mean? Before Kleiner & Perkins, we had all kinds ofinvestment partnerships. There was Fred [Frederick R.] Adler representingGeneral Electric money back in New York, and Reid Dennis, and all thesepeople.There were abuses. I won’t name names, but somebody would see a venture,and they would buy the stock in the venture at $1 a share, and then they’d puttheir fund into it at $10 a share and pocket the difference. I thought that wasjust unconscionable, you know? They would use the fund like a lighthouse toattract ventures, and then a really good one would come along, they’d pick itand the fund would never see it—another abuse. They had no auditedstatements. Most of these investment partnerships did not provide theirinvestors with audited statements. They would co-invest with their fund. Theywouldn’t do deal A or B, but C would come along, look pretty good, so they’dgo into it with their fund, maybe at the same price, who knows, maybe at abetter price. So they’d cherry pick among the deals. I thought all of that wasunconscionable.So we wrote what we called the Investor’s Bill of Rights, [chuckling] right inour first business plan. We pointed out what these abuses were, and that wejust simply wouldn’t do them. And we even took it one step further; that wewouldn’t invest in anything whatsoever that the fund might invest in. I meanwe might invest in real estate, because the fund wasn’t ever going to do realestate, but we would never do anything that the fund could have invested in.So that was a fairly big deal.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How was that received? Perkins: Well, obviously well received, obviously well received.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, but not by your peers who were misbehaving. Perkins: Well, who knows? But, once we did that, and once we were so successful,nobody could do it any differently. That was it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You’d set the standard. Perkins: We set the standard, and it’s still that way. Now our competitors did somethings that we refused to do. And that is that they would give the limitedpartners involvement in approval or disapproval of what would be invested in.We said, “Absolutely not. We will not do that, and we will not even exposeyou to the ventures. We won’t have an annual science fair where you comeback and get to see all the ventures and all that.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And that was happening? Perkins: Well, no, it wasn’t that. We were the first to do the reverse of that, which is toget our companies together to help themselves. But no investors involved. Justto work with each other, support each other, get to know each other, and all.We pioneered that. We are still way ahead on that. So it’s fairly simple; it’sfairly obvious.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: By being proscriptive about what shouldn’t happen, as well as what shouldhappen, aren’t you eliminating a number of potential co-investors? Perkins: No, but we’re eliminating a number of ways to get rich.You look at KKR [Kohlberg Kravis Roberts]. I only can stand in awe of whatthey have done. I mean, they put a fund together, they pay themselves a feefor putting the fund together; they make an investment, they pay themselves afee for making the investment; the investment makes some money, they takethe profit out, whether the rest of the fund is above water or not. To me thisis— In my book I said I was an investor in a cattle-feeding tax-shelter dealonce years ago, and I remember I called the general partner to find out howthings were going, and he said, “Tom, your cows died.” [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] Well, so much for that. Perkins: So in these big funds your cows can die, and they will all get rich. You seethis is the Wall Street syndrome. Now, Kleiner and I, we used to sit aroundand say boy, we are really stupid. I mean we are making whatever we’remaking, which was not bad. But, my God! You know we just wouldn’t havehad the gall to even think of doing what KKR did. I mean to this minute WallStreet just astonishes me in what they do—astonishes me.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: People in general just assume this is the way it’s done? Perkins: This is just the way it’s done, yes. Over the years we’ve never had any disputewith an investor, not once. There has not been a venture capital scandal ingeneral. You go on Google, and you say Wall Street scandal, and you’ll getabout two million hits. Do the same with venture capital, you’ll get maybe100,000. But it will all have to do with the pricing of stock options in theventures themselves, not with venture capital firms. So I think Kleiner and Ishould get some credit for what we did.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Does the industry give you that credit? Perkins: Oh, I think so. I don’t think they’ve thought about it. I think they’d give usplenty of credit for incubating and initiating ventures, which is probably whatwe’ll talk about the next time.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But of course this would all be water off a duck’s back if you hadn’t built asuccessful partnership. Otherwise, who cares what Kleiner and Perkins say? Perkins: Exactly, who cares?There is one interesting thing that goes into the future: we went from a 20-percent carried interest to a 30-percent carried interest.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How far along was it? Perkins: Oh, we’ve had that for years. The way that came about is: I had this idea ofchanging what we were doing and raising a great deal more money andbecoming more of a wholesaler of venture capital, working through otherventure capital partnerships that we knew around the country. I had proposedraising a billion dollars. I was going to use Morgan Stanley to do it, and it wasgoing to happen. To facilitate that I was going to drop our carry from 20percent to 10 percent, and good old Henry Hillman said—this is years ago—he said, “Tom, I will invest some money in that, but if you will only raise$100 million, I’ll take 50 percent of it, and I’ll pay you 30 percent. I foundthat very persuasive.So I called our other partners, the University of California, and so on. I willnever forget—I called the treasurer over at Berkeley for their endowment, andI said, “We’re putting this new fund together. “It’s going to be $100 millionand 30 percent.” “What? NO! Wow, ugh—that’s ridiculous, really terrible.” Isaid, “Okay, never mind.” He said, “Well, wait a minute, wait a minute. Youmean I’ve got to pay 30 percent to participate?” And I said, “Well, this is sortof being forced on us by Henry Hillman.” He said, “I just can’t believe it; Ican’t believe it. Okay.” [laughter] But they have all made more from us at 30percent than they have from anybody else at twenty.All right, I think we have to wind up now. I’ve got to get out of here. Is thiswhat you were looking for?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It definitely is.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: This is the second session with Mr. Perkins. It’s September 23, 2009. We gotKleiner Perkins founded last time. You also talked about raising the first fund. Perkins: Yes, I think we did talk about that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And it wasn’t easy. Perkins: It was very difficult, and we weren’t able to raise the full amount we wished.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So should we go straight to Tandem Computers? Perkins: Sure. We hired Jimmy Treybig and Jack Loustaunou from HP. Jimmy hadbeen manager of the peripherals divisions of HP, and Jack Loustaunou wasthe chief financial officer for the computer divisions of HP. They both wantedto join Kleiner Perkins as partners, and they did.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: As full partners? Perkins: No, we called them employee limited partners. Kleiner and I were the generalpartners with all the risk, but we gave them partnership participation asworking limited partners. It was a special category. So they had an incentive.We did various deals. In my book I talked about what we did—somesemiconductor things. We did a venture in printers, which was a Sutter Hillventure that Sutter Hill invited us to participate in. We did about seven oreight deals. If you exclude Tandem and Genentech and only look at thoseseven or eight deals in that first partnership, they were profitable, but justbarely profitable. I mean it wasn’t a catastrophe, but it was not something youwould ever write home about. As we got into it, we realized, Eugene and I,this is not working. We were not seeing opportunities. I don’t think anybodywas seeing opportunities, world-class, wonderful opportunities that you justreally felt excited about investing in. They just weren’t there. We were gettingbusiness plans, but they were banal, most of them. The sort of thing youwould read and just shrug your shoulders.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Does this just happen that there’s a cluster of nonentities? Perkins: No, Kleiner and I were too early for a big fund in Silicon Valley. The waterhadn’t come to a boil; there just wasn’t that much going on. There was a littlebit, and the little bit that was going on was enough to keep John Bryan andDraper and Rock and all those engaged—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Pitch Johnson. Perkins: —but not that busy. And so we were trying to accelerate everything, and thisis like pushing against a wall when there is no wall; you just sort of fall down.So Eugene and I were open towards and talking about, maybe we’ve got to dothis ourselves. We were talking to Jimmy Treybig and Jack Loustaunou aboutthat too, and basically Treybig said in his Texas accent, “Well, I’ve got anidea.” It was the fault-tolerant computer which he had been involved with atHewlett Packard, which I had been involved with to some extent. But truefault-tolerant computers really didn’t exist. I mean, there were computersystems that were designed to deal with failures, but they weren’t fullyautomatic and fully foolproof.So Jimmy had this idea of a new computer system, and he and I began to kickit around, just between us. I was reasonably expert in computer technologymyself, and I couldn’t see any problem with it, superficially at least, with thetheory of it. So we hired two experts; we hired a hardware expert by the nameof Jim [James A.] Katzman, who was at HP, and a software expert namedMike [Michael D.] Green to work full-time on this idea and see if thehardware and software could be worked out to make this thing feasible, and ofcourse they did. It was a breakthrough in computing; it was a packet-switchedmultiprocessor system that was years ahead of anything else, and it still exists.It’s still going right now at Hewlett Packard, and the technology was veryimportant.So we decided to put a company together around this idea. I wrote thebusiness plan with some help from Jimmy. Jimmy and I tried to raise moneyto finance it, and we couldn’t raise any money, at least initially. We went allover; we went back East. There’s a famous story: Jimmy was very much aTexas boy, and very uncomfortable in clothing, you know, dressed up.[laughter] I wanted to take him to New York to raise money. So one afternoonI took him up to San Francisco—we were down in Menlo Park—and we wentto Brooks Brothers. I bought him everything: shoes, socks, shirts, ties, jacket,pants, everything. The salesman probably thought he was my boyfriend orsomething. [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: He needed to be presentable. Perkins: Yes. This was before Frank [Caufield] joined the partnership, but I rememberhim talking about that later. He said, “Tom had Jimmy’s teeth capped and hisown fangs pulled to go back to Wall Street.” [laughter] The joke is we gotback there, and we were making our presentations, and Jimmy said, [imitatinga Texas accent] “Well, how do I look? Tom dressed me.” He just made a bigjoke of the whole thing. But in spite of his charm and everything, we did notraise the money.But the more I thought about it, the more sales presentations I made, the moreinfatuated I became with the idea myself. So I prevailed upon Kleiner tofinance the whole thing, so that we would do the first round of the company,100 percent out of the partnership, which was a big commitment of ourcapital. Now don’t ask me how much it was, but it was probably pretty closeto $1 million.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now, why does Kleiner finance it? I believe you had some money from thesale of your company. Perkins: No. Kleiner and I had started Kleiner & Perkins; we had put in our ownmoney. One of the things I maybe have mentioned, that bill of rights—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, you did.40 Perkins: The idea is that we would invest as limited partners into Kleiner Perkins,which we did. So any investment that Kleiner Perkins made had our automaticparticipation. So I had to persuade Eugene for the partnership to financeTandem Computers. Which he did; he agreed. Sort of at the last minute, PitchJohnson, who we made a presentation to, decided he would participate in avery small way. But it was an endorsement of the idea.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Are all these people hesitating because they can’t really see how this computeris any better than any other system that’s out there? Perkins: Well, I think there were a number of reasons. First of all, it was a technicalthing, and they were not technologists. I don’t think they fully understood itthe way Jimmy and I did, and Eugene did. Two, there was alreadycompetition: IBM, Hewlett-Packard, and Digital Equipment were already inthe market. Three, the stock market was in one of its funks right about then,and nobody could imagine that two years in the future it would be any better,that sort of thing. And I think people just thought that it would be a mistake.I remember when we had raised our money Henry Hillman said, “What areyou going to invest in?” And I said, “Well, blah, blah, blah.” And I didn’tanswer the question. And he said, “Well I hope you won’t invest inminicomputers, because I think that has come and gone.” Well, this was, ofcourse, a minicomputer. But I hadn’t promised we wouldn’t; I just didn’t saythat we would.So there were a lot of negative ideas out there. When we started the company[Kleiner & Perkins], everybody on Sand Hill Road and at Hewlett-Packardthought we were going to fall flat on our face. Hewlett-Packard gave us notrouble, even though we had hired some people from Hewlett-Packard,because they just thought we were going to fail.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But also you mentioned that Treybig had the idea for the computer while hewas still at Hewlett-Packard. Perkins: He did, he did; he promoted it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But Hewlett-Packard didn’t feel— Perkins: No, no. He tried to— Well, I don’t how hard he pushed, but he did have theidea, but he was not running the whole computer operation. He was justrunning part of it, and he pushed the idea, and HP didn’t do anything with itand had no proprietary interest in it. We never had any trouble with HP onpatents or litigation or anything like that. Because of my connections to HP, Ididn’t want to pirate people from HP and irritate HP, and we never really did.We hired some people, but mostly not, although Tandem had the reputation ofbeing an HP spinout, but it really wasn’t. But that misperception was mostlybecause of Jimmy’s involvement and my involvement.So we developed the system, and it worked. We had a hell of a hard timeselling the first one. It was very, very difficult, and I think we sold, was itCitibank? I think it was Citibank thatwas our very first customer. I remembertalking to the executive that made the decision. I said, “Why did you buy it?”He said, “I figured there was a 70 percent chance you’d never deliveranything, but I wouldn’t risk any money. If you did deliver it, and it did whatyou said it would, it would be fantastic.” So, we did and it did. Then Tandemtook off very fast, and we got all kinds of further financing, and it turned outto be a huge success. So Treybig and Jack Loustaunou decided to work bothfull-time at Tandem. Instead of trying to hire a management team and theystay in the [Kleiner Perkins] partnership, they both left to join Tandem.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And that was fine with you? Perkins: It was fine with me, sure. It was fine with them; it worked out well. I didn’twork full-time at Tandem, but I worked probably 60 percent of my time atTandem, hiring people, recruiting, planning the financial side of it, and thenlater raising endless money, and so forth, plus, just deeply involved in thestrategy of the company.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now that is sort of the nameplate, or whatever the term would be, of KleinerPerkins in the eyes of the world. Perkins: That’s right, yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: From the get-go, you and Kleiner were going to be really hands on inmanaging companies? Perkins: Yes, we always said we would be hands on. But we didn’t think we wouldstart the companies. We thought we would just be deeply involved with theentrepreneur, which we were in everything. But Tandem, Genentech, andHybritech were three huge hits where we really started the companies. So wewent beyond what we said we would do in our original business plan. But thedeep involvement was there always, right from the beginning.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I interpret from that remark that after those three companies you did withdrawa little? Perkins: No, we continued to do it. But first of all, it became something that a lot ofpeople started to do, and it became something called ‘incubations’ and all ofthat. So it’s not that we stopped doing it, it’s more that others began to do it,and so the uniqueness of what we had pioneered began to wear off. But forthose three companies, we were way ahead of the field, way ahead.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now was it almost immediately obvious that Tandem was going to be asuccess? And were you then on a roll so that from then on it wasn’t as difficultto raise money? Perkins: Yes. Tandem never really faltered. It did what it said it would do when it saidit would do it, although the sales were a little slower to take off, and then tookoff more rapidly. But it basically hit its plan. And Tandem was never terriblydifficult to finance because it was much more understandable than Genentech,and it was a computer company. It had great margins, great customers, aworldwide market, proprietary software, proprietary hardware. It was, as theysay, a no-brainer once it was up and running and once we proved it wouldwork. So I have to congratulate Kleiner and myself for taking the initial riskon it, because if it hadn’t worked we would have lost an awful lot of moneyand looked pretty foolish. It would have destroyed that fund, and we wouldn’tbe talking about it now.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, exactly. Would Tom Perkins be a venture capitalist? Perkins: No. God knows what I’d be doing. I wouldn’t be a venture capitalist.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: In that interim period, when things weren’t going well, did you ever have athought in the deep of night that you had made a mistake? Perkins: No, I didn’t. In my book I made a joke of some of the things we did, but theyweren’t that stupid. And we did make a profit on the other things than thesethree companies that were so important. So I mean it wasn’t idiotic. But Idon’t think I ever had a doubt that Tandem Computers would succeed.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And you were pretty confident if Tandem succeeded that you would succeed? Perkins: Oh yes. I remember during the process that we were developing Tandem andbefore we had it working, just being very impatient because I knew it wasgoing to work, and I just wanted to get on with it. And I was right, it did work.Genentech is not quite that simple, but it’s similar. Should we go on to<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, I’d like to. When Treybig and Loustaunou left, of course they left emptyplaces, and I suppose that’s why [Robert A.] Swanson comes in as a juniorpartner. Perkins: That’s right. We needed to replace Treybig because he was the technical,marketing kind of guy, and so we hired Bob Swanson.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But why? Perkins: Well, Eugene knew Bob. Bob worked for Citigroup, I think.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, Citicorp Venture Capital. Perkins: I had never met Bob, but Citigroup had invested in the semiconductorcompany that we had invested in, whose name I can’t remember, which was acatastrophe. It was no good; we lost all our money very quickly, and it was amixture of incompetence and fraud on the part of the entrepreneurs. [laughter]Yes, it’s a bad mix. It wasn’t even a good Ponzi scheme.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [laughter] Well, you’ve got a good model now in Bernard Madoff. Perkins: Eugene was on the board of directors and so was Bob, so they met each other.We’d spun Jimmy out; we were looking for somebody else, and Eugene said,“I know this Bob Swanson who I’m very impressed with. Why don’t you meethim?” So I met him, I was impressed, and we hired him. We replaced JackLoustaunou with a lady named Gerry Myers who did the financial side of ourbusiness for years. We also moved from Menlo Park up to the EmbarcaderoCenter [in San Francisco]. We were in building number two, the secondbuilding built. This was before this building [building 4] was built. We had Perkins’s oral history in the Genentech series is online at http://bancroft.berkeley.edu/ROHO/projects/biosci/. Theoral histories with Herbert Boyer, Robert Swanson, and Arthur Riggs take a somewhat different perspective onaspects of Genentech’s early history.the penthouse; it was beautiful but very small, and that’s neither here northere.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why did you move? Perkins: Well, both Eugene and I loved San Francisco, and we just didn’t want to bepart of the herd. On Sand Hill Road, where we had been, more and moreventure capitalists were gathering, and they were going to lunch, and theywere having entrepreneurs, and everybody knew what everybody was doing.There’s a herd mentality in investing that’s very pernicious and pervasive andcan influence your thinking. It’s just like you really don’t want to know whatthe stock market is doing when you’re making an investment. It doesn’tmatter because you are going to be years in the thing before you ever get outof it anyway. But that short-term herd mentality was annoying to Eugene andmyself, and we thought let’s just get out of here since we both love the Cityanyway. So we did. We were in that office for, oh gosh, I want to say aboutthree years, and then we moved into a bigger office in building number three,next door, for several more years. Finally we had hired so many people thatwere commuting up from the Peninsula that we moved back down, first toPalo Alto and then back to Menlo Park. So that’s where we still are. That’s thewhole cycle.But anyway, Bob Swanson lived in the City and coincidentally, purelycoincidentally, was the roommate of Brook Byers, who worked for PitchJohnson, so they knew each other. I didn’t know that when we hired Bob. Andthen they both married and were no longer bachelors. Anyway, so Bobworked on various Kleiner Perkins deals that we had, one of which was acompany called Cetus, which subsequently became very famous, in the EastBay, founded by two medical doctors, Dr. [Ronald E.] Cape [interviewer note:] and Dr. [Peter J.] Farley. They wereinteresting. They were very promotional, good salesmen, and their businessplan was to automate biological laboratory instrumentation, cell counters, andsuch things. They made a good presentation, and we invested along with abunch of other investors at a fairly high valuation, as I recall. I want to say itwas like $30 million, which I think was the total valuation of the company,which in those days was an awful lot of money. But we invested anyway, andboth Eugene and I were the least comfortable with Cetus of any of the otherthings we were doing because the valuation was so high that it had to be very,very successful for us to make any money.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You were also entering a new field. See Cape’s oral history in the Bancroft Library series. Perkins: Yes and no. It was biotech but from the laboratory side.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Not making drugs. Perkins: Absolutely, no pharmaceuticals, no recombinant DNA, nothing like that. Itwas an instrument company whose focus was in biotechnology, and they werenot getting anywhere. They just were very slow and making almost noprogress, and Eugene and I were very frustrated with them. So I asked BobSwanson to work more or less full-time trying to help Cetus accomplishsomething. So he spent a fair amount time over there, and he did not like thedoctors Cape and Farley, and they didn’t like him.One of the things Swanson did on his own initiative was to set up a luncheon,a brain-storming lunch, with the Nobel Prize winner Donald [A.] Glaser. Hegot the Nobel Prize in physics, but he was working in biology at the time, sohe changed fields. He was a small investor in Cetus, personally somehow. I’veforgotten how that came about, but anyway, he had a small stake in Cetus. Sohe agreed to a lunch with Cape and Farley and Swanson, and at the last minuteSwanson invited me to attend. So we went over to Berkeley somewhere andhad a fairly long lunch. I had never met Glaser before, and he was, of course,a genius, and he was just a fountain of ideas, just this, this, this, this, this. Andno matter what he said, it was like water off a duck’s back—Cape and Farleycould care less; they paid no attention.One of the things that Glaser touched upon was the then possibility that youcould open up a gene and insert something new into it and close it again. Andif you could do that, and if you could have that gene express, you could makea new substance. That idea went over my head at about forty miles an hour,and it didn’t register.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, you don’t come out of biology, no wonder. Perkins: No. And neither did Cape and Farley [register]. But Swanson really got that. Iremember the next day he took me aside and he said, “This idea is absolutelyfantastic; it is revolutionary; it will change the world; it’s the most importantthing I have ever heard.” And I said, “Yes, now that you put it that way,you’re right. Let’s get Cetus to do that.” And Swanson said, “Yes,absolutely.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That’s kind of amazing. Swanson has an undergraduate degree in chemistry.He had no particular background in biology. Perkins: Right, yes. But he was a very smart guy. [chuckling] So he went back over toCetus for the next several weeks trying to persuade them to do something withthis, and they said, “Well, you know, we don’t have the manpower,”whatever, whatever. I remember calling Cape and Farley and saying, “Look,we’ll loan you Swanson and let him set up the division of your company.We’ll put in money and whatever—let’s do this! It sounds really exciting.”“No, no, no, no.” So that was that, and I said, well, I guess that’s that.Swanson, of course, didn’t give up on the idea. I mean this is all very famous,and you know all of this. But he pursued, he read up on it [recombinant DNAtechnology], and then he discovered the two pioneers, or two leading experts,Stanley [N.] Cohen and Herbert W. Boyer, Cohen at Stanford and Boyer atUniversity of California. Between the two of them they had the basic patentson what are called restriction enzymes, which will open and another one that So you can open and then find a match, seal it atthe end of that, close it back again, and have a closed loop of DNA called aplasmid. Well, they had the patents on the enzymes. What I have justdescribed had never been done.So,Swanson met Boyer, and he pestered Boyer on the phone until finallyBoyer agreed to a meeting. They had the meeting, and it was going to be fiveminutes on a Friday afternoon, and that’s as far as Boyer was concerned. Itwas a famous meeting; it went on for hours over beer and everything. Boyer’sattitude was it’s all great, and yes, it might work, and it could be veryimportant. But it’s, you know, ten years. Swanson kept saying “Why does ittake so long?” And Boyer said, “Well you know, you’ve got to write theresearch grants, and you’ve got to get the funding.” And Swanson said, “Wellwhat if you had the money? What if you didn’t have to write any researchgrant, you just have the money?” “Well, then I guess I could buy theequipment.” And after two or three days Boyer had come around to the pointof view, yes, it could be done. And it could be done right away.So Swanson and Boyer put together a business plan—and I think they evenhad the name Genentech—to fund what was Genentech, and they brought it tome. Of course, Swanson just brought it to the office, basically, to be financed.And as I recall they wanted $2 million or $2.5 million, which in those dayswas an awful lot of money, to do Genentech. And they were going to rentspace, hire people, buy equipment, and then see. Well, and you also had tonegotiate rights from the University of California and Stanford to use thetechnology. The three Cohen-Boyer patents cover the recombinant DNA procedure and products.So it was a complex mix of things that had to happen. And then try thisexperiment, see if you could make— First of all you had to make a gene.There was no way in those days to extract a gene from nature, so you had toput it together amino acid [nucleotide] block by amino acid [nucleotide] blockusing analytical chemistry. There were only two organizations in the countrythat could do that; one was MIT and the other was the City of Hope Medical[Center] in Duarte, California. So they were going to try to get space, hirepeople, do this, and then see if it worked.Swanson brought in Boyer; I met him; we went through all this, and of courseI didn’t understand the technology. But I asked Boyer what equipment, whattests, how will you know if you have succeeded, what’s the size, how muchdoes the equipment cost, stuff like that. He had answers to all of that; he’dthought it all through. Although I didn’t know really in depth what they weretalking about, I did understand that they had a pretty coherent plan. So thenthey went away and came back with a proposal to do Genentech, so that goesin chronologically before what I have just said about the $2.5 million.I talked to Eugene, and we both came to the conclusion that this is so close topure research that it’s not appropriate for venture capital. I sat down with Boband I said, “You know, I think it probably might work, but Kleiner and I, andwhoever else invests in this thing, will end up owning so much of this in orderto justify taking that kind of risk that you and Boyer won’t have much ofanything. Why don’t you do it differently? Why don’t you figure out someway to subcontract these different pieces of this experiment and prove that itworks, file for patents, and all that? And then we’ll put in more money.” AndBob said, “Well, the trouble is that we have to make this gene step by step,and what we want to make is insulin, and it’s going to take a lot of money tomake that gene.” And I said, “What about some other gene, some shorter,simpler gene, something that will prove the principle, but won’t take so muchmoney?” So, he basically went away for three or four days, and I think hetried to raise money from others; I’m not sure about that, but he came back.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: He did go to other people. Perkins: Yes, okay, and he got turned down.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. Perkins: Yes, and I don’t know who they were, but I knew he—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Charles Crocker was one of them. Perkins: Nobody would have done what he wanted. So he came back, and he basicallysaid, “Okay, I’ve talked to Boyer. The gene we’ll pick is for a thing calledsomatostatin; it’s a human hormone.” (We still don’t know why we make it[in our bodies], but we make something called somatostatin.) “It’s a very shortgene. It would be the proof of principle, and I can hire the City of Hope, or Ithink I can, and we can hire Cal [University of California] and et cetera, etcetera.” And I said, “Okay!” I checked with Kleiner, so we committed$150,000, which sounds like nothing, which was nothing, to start Genentech.So Bob had our check, which was enough to get the somatostatin gene made.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You said, this is a risky thing—all we’re going to do is put $100,000 in it? Perkins: No. I think I put in $150,000, I’m not sure. Or was it $100,000?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: No, you put $100,000 in. Perkins: I can’t remember. We ended up with a quarter of a million in it. But I thoughtthat they would fall short and that I wanted— Look, I wanted to put in moremoney than the $100,000 because I wanted to own more of Genentech than athird. [chuckling] Swanson didn’t want us to own more than that for obviousreasons, for stock dilution. So we were both right. It did take more moneythan $100,000. I think it took another $150,000 by the time we had gottenthrough that first phase, another $150,000. I remember, I think the total was$250,000 that Kleiner Perkins had in it, and we did own, we wound up withabout a third of the company, with Swanson and Boyer having the other twothirds.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You’re going at it, to my mind, in a financier’s way. If I were doingsomething like that I would be thinking, how much is it going to cost to testthe technology? How much is it going to take to do that proof of principleexperiment? Perkins: That is what we did.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is it? Perkins: Oh sure, because instead of renting a building, hiring the people, buying theequipment, and then finding out, we flipped all of that out of the way, andproved the principle.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, I guess, but you were describing it in terms of what percentage of thecompany would be owned. Perkins: Well, sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It’s all in there? Perkins: It’s all in there. It’s not either or. So Bob and I were both right. I did get toinvest more money and did get to own more of the company.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now why would you want to own more of the company? It was very risky. Perkins: [chuckling] No, it isn’t. If the experiment works, this is the greatestinvestment in the history of the world! You want to own as much of it as youpossibly can while it’s cheap.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, but a lot of people would look at it in the exact opposite manner. If I’mgoing to get in this at all, it’s going to be with a very small stake because Idon’t think this is certain. Perkins: Well, but it was a small stake. It worked for all concerned. It worked for mebecause we ended up owning a lot of Genentech, and it worked for Bob andHerb for the same reasons. The experiment, of course, was successful. We diddo insulin. We filed for patents in every direction. And then, well, I’mjumping ahead, but from then on Genentech did nothing but raise money. Iwas chairman of the board and the financier behind Genentech. I’ve forgottenhow many rounds we had. I raised pretty close to $3 billion for Genentechover the years. The public issue, then these research partnerships, industrialinvestors, public issue, on and on. It was fun and exciting.So we ended up with a really astonishing partnership, I think, with Swansonof course running Genentech; Boyer on the board but detached andscientifically involved but not in any way from the business [standpoint]; andmy responsibility of raising the money, always making sure Genentech didn’trun out of money. And it just worked perfectly for years and years. There wasalways some rivalry between Bob and myself but not really that serious.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Meaning in terms of who was really going to take control of the company?50 Perkins: Well, no—yes and no. You know, I’m the proverbial 800-pound gorilla.[laughter] We had a three-man board of directors: Boyer, Swanson, andPerkins.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Exactly. And was that deliberate? Perkins: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that usually your way of operating, to work on such small boards? Perkins: The smaller the board the better, always.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: For the obvious reasons. Perkins: For the obvious reasons. And so for a long time, the whole board ofGenentech was just the three of us. And we met frequently, and I was deeplyinvolved in the business strategy of Genentech and sort of the researchstrategy; I wouldn’t say the scientific strategy, but the researchstrategy—which products and so on we should do. And I think Bob— Well, itworked. We never really quarreled. I never tried to run Genentech. I couldhave very well, easily, have run Tandem Computers, and Jimmy Treybigknew that. So I never had to quite do it, because he knew I could do it. It wasdifferent with Genentech. I couldn’t have run Genentech. I didn’t have thefeeling for the technology that Bob had.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Which is kind of amazing in itself, considering where he came from. Perkins: Yes, but he spent full-time learning this technology from the ground up.Remember, when Genentech was started it was all new.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, it was. Perkins: So he became a total expert in the whole science of it, which I never did. Icould talk for an hour about how it works, and I would convince you, but Istill wouldn’t know what I’m talking about. [<|endoftext|>
Interviewer laughs] But he really didknow; he really did know. But very clearly, he was happy to let me do thefinancial side of it, which I did. So it was a good partnership. The only timewe really disagreed was on taking the company public. I felt that we should doit, the timing was right, and that we could get an astonishing valuation onGenentech.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Timing now in terms of the stock— Perkins: In the market, the stock market. It was one of those windows, you know? Andwhen it’s open you should go through it. And Bob didn’t want to do it becausewe didn’t need the money, for one, and two, he knew how much more workthere was going to be for himself.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But is that really true that you didn’t need the money? Perkins: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because at that point you had various contracts with pharmaceuticalcompanies but— Perkins: Well, we were venture capital; I’ve forgotten who all was in it, but Genentechwas a hot property. Once that experiment worked, the valuation on Genentechskyrocketed. And even though Kleiner & Perkins invested some more money,it was smaller and smaller amounts at ever higher prices.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see, yes. Perkins: Yes, so it wasn’t a shortage of money. I just felt that the public would put sucha high valuation on Genentech that we should do it, and that once thatvaluation was achieved it would stick. I was correct about that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What changed Bob’s mind? Perkins: Well, okay. So we debated this for about three weeks, and it was just classic. Iwas very strong in favor of it, Bob was very strong against it, and Boyer wasthe swing vote, and he wouldn’t vote. He said, “I will vote with the majorityof my friends.” [laughter] So, it was brilliant, absolutely brilliant.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And it’s so revealing of character, too. Perkins: In other words—yes, you work this out guys. And what tipped it was I foundout that Cetus was talking to investment bankers and was going to go publicand would be the first biotechnology company. Now Bob and I both by thistime hated Cetus. You know, we would make money when they went public,but we hated Cetus. And I sat down with Bob and I said, “Bob, are you reallyprepared to let Cetus get the limelight?”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Going public. [chuckling] And that did it? That was it? Perkins: And he thought about it, and he said, “You’re right, let’s go.” And then, it was100 percent, 100 percent. And of course we just rocked the world! It was thehottest IPO in history up until that time.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I know that. But I have read articles saying that not everybody was happy withthe fact that the share price flew up to such extraordinary levels. Perkins: Well, I don’t know who was not happy with it. [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I mean outside the company. [laughter] I’m not sure what was meanteither, but the only thing I can speculate is that it put huge pressure onanybody who came afterwards to do something similar. And of course Cetusdid in a way. Perkins: Well, isn’t that a pity. Well, Cetus did in a way, but as you know, Cetus wasfundamentally a failure. They did discover CPA, which is poly—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: No, PCR. Perkins: PCR, polymerase chain reaction. Kary [B.] Mullis discovered that and wonthe Nobel Prize for doing that, which enabled Cetus to emerge successfully.But I’ve always said, eventually every pig finds its truffle, because Cetus wasnot really a success.But anyway, I was very keen on taking Genentech public because Ithought—I was right—we would dominate the field, we’d suck all theoxygen, and we would be able to use our new celebrity status to hire the bestpeople in the world to help us grow. All of which we did. And we could useour public price to set the stages for subsequent rounds of financing, which wedid do and which we had to have, in Japan and Europe and all kinds of places.And these research [and development clinical] partnerships, which Fred [A.]Middleton and I invented, and that’s another story.But the only downside was that— Well, it wasn’t really a downside. All theemployees at Genentech had gotten stock options at fractions of the offeringprice of the company. They were restricted stock which then had to convertinto common stock.Let me just step back a moment into the philosophy that Kleiner & Perkinshad, Kleiner and I. It was that we wouldn’t get rich unless we did it on theshoulders of the entrepreneurs that we financed and the employees of thecompanies we financed. That sounds like a platitude and something that’s agood thing to say, but we really did believe it. And I think we had thereputation for being too generous, and being always sure that everybody didwell, which is a great reputation if you want to make sure you see everything.It’s just like when I was collecting art or automobiles or something. Iencouraged people to think that I paid too much, because then I would seeeverything. If I saw a piece or a car or something, and if I didn’t want it,instead of saying, “Well, I’ll give you 80 percent of what you’re asking,” I’djust say no or yes and not haggle. We consciously did that in the beginning,and we did see everything, because the entrepreneurs want the minimumdilution, and why not go to the people that will pay the top dollar, which wasus. So it was a consciously cultivated strategy. That was one.And then two: we wanted to make sure that the employees of the ventures hada lot of participation in the venture. To pull a number out of the air, 20 percentwould be sort of the rule of thumb. Even though the primary entrepreneurhimself or herself—usually himself—thought, here are these people, I don’thave to give them that much, we forced participation up to about that level inall of these ventures.We had done that with Genentech. So all of the employees at Genentech,virtually 100 percent of them, right down to the janitors, had cheap stock inGenentech, and they all made a lot of money on that public issue. So the onlyproblem with taking Genentech public was that we raised the price frompennies, to, I don’t know, let’s say $50 a share for new stock options. For awhile that was okay; we were still able to hire people. But then the flood ofother biotech companies started to emerge, and our small competitorseverywhere were able to attract very important scientists and technologistsusing cheap stock because they had not yet gone public.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, I see. Perkins: So we were at a competitive disadvantage at Genentech because of our ownsuccess. This is one my great inventions; I have three great inventions: thelaser, junior common stock, and off-balance sheet financing. [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Okay. Perkins: Anyway, so the second great invention was junior common stock. I went toBob. (We had not been able to hire somebody because he went to work forone of these small competitors for cheap stock.) I said, “We’ve got to get backto the way we were when we were offering cheap stock.” So we hired lawyersand invented this idea of a junior level of stock. And why was it junior? Well,it could never be common stock unless various things happened. First of all, inthe event of a merger it would just be wiped out. Unless certain financial goalswere achieved, it would never convert to common stock. We set the financialgoals far enough in the future so there was some risk. And junior stock didn’thave voting rights. We piled stuff onto this junior common stock so that wecould price it at one tenth of the public market price. And we got thisapproved by the SEC. It was one of my great inventions.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that a fight with the SEC? Perkins: No, not in the beginning. Not in the beginning. We had good lawyers andgood analysis and good everything, and the SEC said okay. And so we startedto use junior common stock to attract— So we immediately became verycompetitive again. So we had everything: we were a public company, and yetwe were able to offer start-up options to the employees. Now, here is case ofthe chief financier figuring out ways to give the company away at bargainbasement price in order to grow it. So I mean I have to give myself somecredit; it’s exactly the opposite of what Wall Street would have done. If theycould have figured out a way to get ten times the public price they wouldhave.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How did you get that idea? Perkins: Necessity is the mother of all invention. [laughter] It was totally unique, and itworked just fine. What finally happened, and I think we did about threerounds of this—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Which would have taken you how far in time? Perkins: Several years in the future. But I’m so bad on dates and stuff like that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Into the eighties—not past the eighties, though? Perkins: Into the eighties, I think.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh it would have had to have been into the eighties. Perkins: It was definitely into the eighties.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But not into the nineties. Perkins: Not into the nineties. What finally happened was that you can’t keep ideas likethis secret. We didn’t have any patent or copyright on this idea, so othercompanies thought, this is a great idea! And they copied it, but they didn’t doit as rigorously as we did, and they basically weren’t putting any meaningfulrestrictions on the stock. They were just kind of pricing stuff cheap. And theSEC prohibited the whole idea, totally, except for the ones we had already putin place.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because they couldn’t take that away? Perkins: Well, we had done it right, and I don’t think that they wanted to take it away.But they just said, “Look, no more.” But [junior stock] worked, and it workedvery, very well for a long time, and that was great. That was one of the secretsof Genentech’s success.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What also interests me is the mindset of the scientists who are becoming alertto this new industry. Perkins: Yes, it didn’t take the scientists very long to figure out they could all becomemulti-millionaires.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: When you talk to those early Genentech scientists, like [David V.] Goeddeland [Dennis G.] Kleid, they weren’t coming to Genentech for the money; theywere coming to do the science. This was pre-public Genentech. Perkins: Well, yes and no. Don’t believe everything they tell you. They were notoblivious to the fact that they might make millions.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] You think? In the beginning? Perkins: Yes, of course they were not oblivious! Any more than Herb Boyer. Look—why does Herb Boyer not have the Nobel Prize?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I’ve heard about ten million reasons. But anyway, what’s yours? Perkins: It’s because he is probably a billionaire because of Genentech. That’s thereason, and I think the only reason.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I’m sure the fact that he had gone commercial, to use that awful term, did nothelp him with the Nobel committee. Perkins: Yes, right. Of course not. Or any of the others. But it just made total sense.Okay, since we’re still on Genentech, let me just touch on my third greatinvention, which was the limited partnerships for R&D financing. Are youaware of those?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I am. [interruption to change tape][End Audio File 3] Perkins: We proved the technology. Genentech is a big deal: we proved that man couldmake a new form of life, that that new form of life would make something ofno use to itself whatsoever, in fact, might even be negative to its ownexistence but would be something we wanted. Now that is a breakthrough, andthat’s why Cohen and Boyer should get the Nobel Prize. It’s absolutelyfundamental. And we all understood that at the beginning. It didn’t take yearsto figure that out. When we first talked about it, we understood if we can dothis, it’s like the light bulb. I mean it’s a big deal.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Had you finished your previous thought? Perkins: No, I was just going to talk about this third form of financing, the researchlimited partnerships, R&D partnerships. Okay, so I had in mind thatGenentech wanted to go public, and as a public company would be reportingearnings per share to shareholders. We were in the awkward situation ofhaving no revenue—zero—and only expense. So our P&L [profit and loss]statement would be a catastrophe. You start with zero sales, huge expenses,and a big loss. I thought sooner or later this is going to limit our growth andmake it very difficult for us to be a public company and a successful publiccompany. And this is long before Ken Lay and Skilling invented the offbalance sheet thing. It was invented by Fred Middleton, CFO at Genentech,and myself. I take 90 percent credit; he takes ninety percent credit. You willhave to decide.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] Do you fight about it? Perkins: No, it doesn’t matter. But it was an absolute breakthrough because weconverted our P&L statement from zero sales and then expenses to big sales,no expenses, and profit just like that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It’s pretty neat. Perkins: It’s a neat trick if you can do it. And we did it, and we did it several times.Again, we went to the SEC—and this is the difference between Ken Lay andSkilling. We went to the SEC, explained it all, got them to bless it, andpermitted us to sell it to investors, which we did. We financed a lot of thegrowth of Genentech with these. I think we did three of these partnerships. Iwas a great believer in it; I invested personally in these partnerships, and theywere very successful. Was there a conflict of interest? Of course, but we did itanyway. And, so I say that was a pretty important invention for me. It gotcopied by our competitors, again it got abused, and again the SEC prohibitedit, but afterwards.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So people are watching Genentech, aren’t they? Perkins: Oh they watch Genentech; they watch Tom Perkins.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I want to quote Tom Perkins, and this comes from Valley Boy. Yousaid, “Genentech was one of the most successful companies ever created, andby any measure the highlight of my venture capital career.” And that’s whatyou’ve been saying all along in different words. But what do you think ofwhen you say “the greatest thing in my career”? Are you thinking of themoney made, or? Perkins: Well, it’s all of the above. First of all, just to be sanctimonious: we save livesat Genentech, right? So we save lives; we also make a lot of money.[chuckling] We have enabled not just the creation of a company but thecreation of an entire industry. The whole biotech industry spun out ofGenentech in one way or another, and Hybritech, I would say. It was exciting.We never stumbled, you know, et cetera, et cetera. It just was a fantasticventure. I came close with Tandem Computers. Google is great and all of that. p. 117.But I don’t think there will ever be another Genentech—of that incrediblemixture of science and money-making. [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, that’s a pretty nice way to end on Genentech. Perkins: Okay.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you want to say something about Hybritech? Perkins: Yes, sure. Hybritech came along rather quickly after Genentech. Brook [H.]Byers, who we’d hired to replace Bob Swanson, had a great interest inbiotechnology. And so did we by this time; it was obvious to us that this wasgoing to be a big deal. Brook was approached by a medical doctor researchernamed Ivor Royston at the University of California, San Diego who had read apaper presented at—I can’t remember if it was Oxford or Cambridge—on athing called monoclonal antibodies, which is a single-cell source of ultrapure— Because [the monoclonal antibody] comes from a single source, it’sultra pure, is the essence of it. And that was given away in this paper; [theinventors] hadn’t filed for any patent protection. It was very, very foolish ofeither Oxford or Cambridge, whichever one it was, very, very foolish. Itwould not have happened in America at that time.Anyway, Royston had read this paper, understood immediately theimplications of it, and proposed a business based on the science to Brook.Brook went down to San Diego, met him, and was persuaded that it was agood idea, and persuaded me to put up the money. Pitch Johnson had neverforgiven me for not letting him into Genentech. So I let him into Hybritech.And I thought at the time, great! Here we go again; we have done Tandem,Genentech, we’re going to do Hybritech. Brook will spin out and runHybritech and keep the machine going. Brook wasn’t quite sure that hewanted to spin out. And, so we said, “Okay, well, you be chairman of theboard, and then if you want to be CEO, there’s nothing to it. And I’ll go on theboard.” Which I did, and we raised the money, and so forth. Now, you know,I’m the 800-pound gorilla, so, yes, Brook was chairman of the board, but Iwas on the board. [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And he probably knew that. Perkins: And I think Brook knew that, but I had a full expectation that Brook wouldleave the partnership and run Hybritech, and I think he did too in thebeginning. But for whatever reason he decided he’d rather be a venturecapitalist.We were also approached by Ted [Howard E.] Greene, who wanted to do theexact same thing. He had an idea for a company that would be a competitor toHybritech. He didn’t know about Hybritech, and he brought his idea to us, andwe said, “Hey, don’t do that, just run Hybritech,” which he did. And it was avery big success, Hybritech. I don’t want to spend a lot of time on it, but itwas a big success. We sold it to [Eli] Lilly and eventually we made $1 billionon Hybritech.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, a pretty good string of successes. Perkins: Not bad.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, and sort of despite yourself, there you are in the biomedical field. Perkins: Yes. Now I never really did much further with it. Brook went on in many,many other fields. But I think the partnership can take credit for creating thebiotech industry.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And was Kleiner behind all this? Perkins: Kleiner, by this time, was an interested observer, but not involved.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because he was emeritus, or? Perkins: No, he, he— Eugene was a dear, dear, dear friend, but I don’t want— I’m notdenigrating Eugene, but he would be very happy to take a nap after lunch andlet Tom do it all, you know? And there was just more and more of— That’ssort of what happened.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, he was ten years older than you. Perkins: He just withdrew into his own— Eugene was a great investor, a great partner,and a wonderful friend. However, he was extremely non-confrontational, andhe never really— You had to draw him out to find out what he was reallythinking. For example, he was on the board of Tandem Computers for years.He would go to board meetings and never say a word, not a word. If I’d askhim during a board meeting, he would not really say much. And onlyafterwards I would say, “Gene what did you think about—?” And then out itwould come, and it would be terrific, really good stuff. So I had to alwaysremind myself to pick Gene’s brains, keep him involved, get his participation,60because it wasn’t immediately forthcoming. He was very shy. I never sawEugene lose his temper—ever—on anything.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you were the pusher? Perkins: Yes, and the emotional [one]; I lost my temper all the time or seemed to.[<|endoftext|>
Interviewer chuckles] It wasn’t always real; it wasn’t always real.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It was a good show. I don’t have any trouble believing any of this. [laughter]All right, may I ask some probably to you very boring questions on venturecapital strategy? Perkins: Go ahead. Sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Okay, let’s get down to the real basics. When you are looking at a potentialinvestment, what is first and foremost in your mind? What primarily are youlooking for? Perkins: Let me give you a glib answer first. The glib answer is: if people say how doyou write a business plan? My answer is, “I can’t tell you; I can only tell youhow we read one.” Which is, we start at the back, and if the numbers are big,we look at the front to see what kind of business it is. [laughter] So, I’manswering your question by saying opportunity is the thing you lookfor—scale. In other words, there is a big difference between just a good ideaand a good idea that will make you a huge amount of money. So to make ahuge amount of money, it has to have certain ingredients. Brook will say thethree secrets are market, market, and market, or customer, customer,customer. You’ve got to have a big market for whatever this thing is so that itcan be scaled up and make it worth your while to bother with it, because thereis no such thing as low risk; there is no such thing as a low-risk deal, in myopinion. I mean, just look at the people that bought these mortgages.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, yes. Perkins: You know, there is always risk, and you may not know what it is, but it’salways there. And you’re kidding yourself if you say, “Well, I may not makeso much money on this, but it’s a low-risk investment.” Baloney. You willlose your money, and it’ll be a high-risk investment; you just didn’t knowwhat it was—that’s philosophical. So you look for a big market and, at least inmy case, risk associated with it. Now why do I say that? And the answer isbecause if it’s a risk-free investment, everybody will do it. You might be first,but you’ll have herds of competitors. You will never get the market share; youwill never achieve the scale that you need to achieve.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: This is Perkins’ Law. Perkins: Yes. Now the risk doesn’t have to be technical. It can be anything; it can bepeople risk, patent risk, market risk, production risk, science risk, but therehas got to be some doubt, risk to it, or everybody would do it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, that’s interesting. Perkins: And it’s so obvious, but it’s fundamental. So then that leads to how do you doit? Well, you put in the least amount of money to get rid of whatever youthink the risk is. Genentech was: would God let you do this? That was therisk, and we got rid of that risk for $250,000 or less. Okay, TandemComputers it was: can you actually make a computer system wheremultiprocessors simultaneously ask for the network? That’s a very severetechnical risk. If you can solve that problem, you got it. Hybritech—what wasthe risk? I would say the Hybritech risk was more people. But anyway, youhave just got to be sure, or try to be sure, that the initial investment reducesthe risk, and then pile in the money afterwards, and you will be verysuccessful. Now does everything that Kleiner Perkins has done meet thatformula? No. Segway: a perfect example of an investment that violates mybasic principles.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That you agreed to invest in? Perkins: No, I would have never. No, I didn’t agree to it. I wasn’t on the scene. I wouldhave never agreed to that, never.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What went wrong there? Perkins: Well, the risk is obviously market risk. You’ve got to build the damn thing,try to sell it to the post office, and find out, oh, they don’t want it. I mean youare in millions— So this means there are plenty of investment opportunitiesthat you just don’t do; you walk away from them. If you can’t structure it insuch a way as to get rid of the risk, don’t do the deal. And that’s why Kleinerand I turned down Apple Computer. [<|endoftext|>
Interviewer laughs] Which is stupid to admitto, but there was no technical risk in that. The risk was 100 percent marketing.I didn’t realize what a genius Steve Jobs was at marketing. And we turned itdown without meeting Steve Jobs, which was really, really stupid. But youcan’t win ‘em all. Can’t win ‘em all. We can’t win ‘em all.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Where are people coming into your strategy? Perkins: Okay, I hope this will be useful, because what you’re going to hear is differentthan I think most of the other venture capitalists you have talked to will tellyou. There is always the question: what’s more important, the person or theidea? I think it’s the idea. Most venture capitalists will say it’s theentrepreneur or the person. I say it’s the idea, for a couple of reasons. First ofall, bad people don’t have good ideas, you know? [chuckling] So you kind ofget a good person with a good idea. But the most important thing is theopportunity that the idea brings to you. So many times we have backed, Iwouldn’t say second-rate, rather we have backed high-risk individuals becausethey had a good idea, and we have not tried to replace that individual withsomebody better and keep the idea. And we have many, many times backed aventure that did not have a complete team. Now back when Kleiner and Istarted, most venture capitalists wanted a full business plan and the wholeteam.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: In place? Perkins: In place, and then they’ll maybe write the check. Eugene and I, and ever after,have not done that. First of all, it’s better if you meet the entrepreneur beforehe has written the business plan, and then you help write the business plan,like I did with Tandem Computers and Genentech. You maybe don’t send thebusiness plan to all of your competitors. [laughter] Not because of the price ofstamps. So that’s one. So you lock the entrepreneur into your own way ofdoing things by helping him [write], or indeed writing, the business plan.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And most entrepreneurs are quite happy to have you take over that way? Perkins: We’re talking about complex things here. The answer is yes, if they really getit, because at the end of the day we will make them very, very rich if they playit our way. And we have done it endless times.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, you’ve got your record. Perkins: So we have our record. And we make them rich by— We want to be thecontrol and dominant investor in the deal. So if the entrepreneur starts off bypercent of this venture because I don’t want you guys running it,” we educatethem very quickly. We educate them immediately that even if we are 1, or 2,or 3 percent of this venture—if we are the lead investor, and you don’t dowhat we want you to do—when the next round of financing comes up and ifwe don’t participate, you’ve had it. So we control this venture, whether youknow it or not, as soon as you take our check. And this is a blinding revelationto some of them! And in some cases they say, “Well, that’s baloney,” and wenever see them again, you know. And you never hear of them again either.[chuckling]The ones that get it say okay, but then we counter that by saying, “Look,we’re in this for the long haul; we just hope you’re as ambitious as we are,because you won’t be able to get rid of us by going public, for example. We’llstill be there. And going public is just one event in the life of your company;it’s something we’ve done over and over. You will only do it once; we’reexperts at it. Why would we leave when we’ve done that?” And to theentrepreneur that is very self confident and believes in what he is going to do,this is not discouraging to hear from his prospective partner. In other words,I’m going to be a very strong partner; you won’t be able to get rid of me, but Iam going to stay with you, and my job is to make sure you don’t run out ofmoney.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, but I bet there are a lot of egos out there that would find that verythreatening. Perkins: Yes, there are. But this is another hidden law, and that is that the venturecapitalist cannot have the big ego. We’ve got big egos, and listening to mebabble you are going to think I’ve got one of the biggest ever. But you’ve gotto let the entrepreneurs, you’ve got to let the Bob Swansons, the JimmyTreybigs, be the super stars. The venture capitalist has to be in the backgroundas much as possible. It’s their [the entrepreneur’s] baby.It’s a complex relationship between the good venture capitalist and the goodentrepreneur. You want to guide the entrepreneur, and you want him to takeyour advice, but you don’t want to be so threatening or intimidating that theyhide anything from you. So the minute anything goes wrong, you want theentrepreneur to call you, just right away. In order for that to happen, you can’tsay, “Well, why the hell did you do that?” No, no, no, it’s got to be, “Okay,I’ll be right there. Let’s get on it.” And help—help, help, help in a totally nonthreatening way so that you solve the problem before it becomes a crisis. Andif you do this successfully you get great ventures.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I’ve read that you have done a lot of interpersonal work in these situations,getting people together who are at odds, to put it very simplistically. Perkins: Yes, right. I think that’s true. Well, I think you learn as you go along in life,you learn how to do certain things. I was a pretty good manager at HewlettPackard. I was able to handle complicated people in difficult situations.Certainly as a venture capitalist you have lots of opportunity to do that,because you’re dealing with very bright people, high motivations, big egos,and problems. It’s a complex mix.One of the longest and most serious ongoing problem that I had was therelationship between Bob Swanson and [G.] Kirk Raab at Genentech. Bobwanted to step back and spend more time with his family, enjoy his fortune,and delegate to somebody else. I didn’t push this on Bob; it was his idea. Ithought he was just doing fine and just keep on, you know? So anyway, wehired Kirk Raab, who had been president of Abbott Laboratories, and he wasgreat, and Bob was great—and they clashed all the time. Bob was nevercomfortable letting Kirk really run things, and Kirk was never reallycomfortable with having Bob around, and it was just a constant problem—andI was the glue. I think I’ve said in my book, I probably averaged a day ormaybe even two days a month just dealing with those two personalities.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Genentech was going through a rough period then too, remember? Perkins: Well, it was up, and it was down; it was everything in between. This went onfor years, so it wasn’t just a once only thing. I'd get a call, “You’ve got tocome down.” “What is it?” “Well, the annual report is coming out, and hewants his name in front of mine. [<|endoftext|>
Interviewer chuckles] I just saw the rough draftof the annual report, and he’s put his name in front of mine.” Now whoeversaid it, the CEO or the chairman, [I said:]“Just flip a coin guys!” And I’d godown—Okay, so how do you do it? How do you actually handle people like this? AndI’ll give you the secret, and it has taken me years to learn how to do this. Youhave got them both there; you’ve got to do it with both individuals, or three,no matter how many. They have all got to be there, because it doesn’t do anygood to try to do it one-on-one. It’s like you can talk to them forever and itwon’t make any difference. But if they’re both there, you say, “Okay, this iswhat I think Kirk is thinking.” You say this in front of Kirk, and then youexplain to the room, as accurately without any spin as best you can, what he isthinking. “Now this is what I think Bob is thinking,” and you do the samething as accurately, as unemotionally, as you possibly can. If you do that right,you take all of the temperature out of the water. The emotional content justcollapses, and you put on the table two quite reasonable points of view, whichwhen they look at them dispassionately you could interchange them. And soyou’re able to do that by defusing it, and it’s a neat trick. You can’t always getit right, and it doesn’t always work, but when you get it right, it solves theproblem.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And did it solve that specific problem? Perkins: Many, many, many times. But I had the trouble that it didn’t stay solved. Itstayed solved all the time I was doing it, for years. But when I left the board itblew up within ninety days.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Have you tried it in your private life? Perkins: Oh, of course, of course! [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All right, how many Perkins’ laws are there? Perkins: I don’t remember.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, here is another one: market risk is inversely proportional to technicalrisk. Perkins: Yes, that’s one. We touched on that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Okay, in the first session, you gave me the strong impression that you are notmadly in love with Wall Street. Perkins: No, I hate Wall Street.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, let’s get some basis for that statement. Perkins: First of all, there are some exceptions. William [R.] Hambrecht is anexception, and there are some others.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Sandy Robertson? Perkins: Sandy Robertson, to some extent. I can’t think of the name—he was atLehman Brothers, but he’s gone now. Anyway it doesn’t matter; the guy thatdid the Roche/Genentech merger.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: This time? Perkins: No, when I was involved; it will come to me in a minute. I remember: it’sFred Frank. So there are some exceptions. But I pretty well otherwise hadvery bad experiences with Wall Street. So my dislike for Wall Street is basedon experience. I have just been screwed and disappointed and overchargedand flummoxed so many times by these guys that I have just had it! I’ve runout of investment bankers. There is nobody left that I respect, and it’s justbased on experience.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And it’s usually— Perkins: Negative.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [laughter] I gathered. Do you want to give a specific example, or is thatenough? Perkins: Well, you know I have got to be a little careful of what I say, from a legalpoint of view, because a lot of these people are still around. Let’s just say Iwas involved in taking a company public once, and I won’t say which one itwas, and the investment banker, the principal of the investment banker, wasshorting the stock personally in his own account at the same time he wasselling it to the widows and orphans that he was supposed to be selling it to.And this is illegal.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That gives me an idea of what you’re talking about. Perkins: This is illegal! It’s against the law for one thing. The only good news is he losta lot of money on it because then the company was strong. But, this is WallStreet.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I don’t mean by that question to put you on the spot. I was just trying toget an idea of what kinds of thing you were talking about. Perkins: I attacked them in my book, and if I had only known how right I was I wouldhave done even more! And this last episode— What Wall Street has done inthe last two years is unbelievable.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: We’re running out of time, so I would like to hear what you have to say aboutCalifornia as a place where venture capital is happening, particularly sinceyour earlier career was on the East Coast. Perkins: Right. Well, first of all California isn’t the only place it can happen, and it’shappened in many other places. But there is something, or was somethingspecial at least, about California that made Silicon Valley possible. Gee, it’s alot of things that I think came together at the right time. First of all, it’s theHewlett-Packard Company, Hewlett, Packard themselves, the relationshipbetween Hewlett-Packard and Stanford University, the idea ofentrepreneurship which Hewlett and Packard had, and this ethical standardthat Hewlett and Packard set for the Hewlett-Packard Company whichpermeated through the whole valley. Which is what made the spy scandal so So that’s one.Two: the weather and the desirability of living in Northern California hasattracted brains foreverfor a long time, and it will continue to do so. Three: theuniversity environment at Cal and Stanford, obviously, in particular, but notonly the universities, but their medical schools for the whole bioscience sideof it. And, the relative willingness of—and I am going way back now into theseventies—of the Bank of America, and to some extent Wells Fargo, to lendinto fledgling ventures to a greater degree than their counterparts would havedone on the East Coast. Then, the advent of professional venture capital,Kleiner Perkins, Sutter Hill, Davis & Rock, and so forth, which happened herereally faster than it did in New York. So you add all those things up, and that’sthe explanation.And then, it’s a bit of a self-fulfilling prophecy too, as entrepreneurs begin tosucceed more people realize, yes, I can do that, too! And thirty years ago let’ssay, let’s say thirty years ago, everybody in Northern California that had acollege degree knew somebody that had been successful as an entrepreneur,knew somebody. That counterpart back East, nobody knew anybody that hadbeen successful. So, just the fact that—yes, if that guy can do it, I can do ittoo!With all the other positive factors in place—and pretty much they are allpositive—the only negative factor is that it costs so much to live here and thetaxes are high. But other than that there aren’t really any negatives that I canthink of. Plus—maybe it’s so obvious—but it’s a total meritocracy. I mean, ifyou look at the racial mix of companies that we’ve founded, it’s a UnitedNations; we’ve got everybody. You just don’t even hear or think about anyethnic or gender bias in Silicon Valley; it just doesn’t exist.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Would you think bias would be a factor elsewhere? Perkins refers to the turmoil of 2006 on the Hewlett-Packard board. For his viewpoint, see Valley Boy, chapter one. Perkins: I think it was, maybe not now, but twenty years ago, thirty years ago, sure. Imean there were clubs not that many years ago that a Jew couldn’t get intoback East.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right. Think of the medical schools, too. Perkins: Yes, but not here, not here. And there’s a lot of whacky things about SanFrancisco. God knows, it’s too much so. But its openness and its liberality wasa very good thing for venture capital. Maybe not a good thing for other thingslike drugs and God knows what else, but you know what I mean. That’s whywe love the Bay Area. I love San Francisco.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I am with you. All right—a little bit on philanthropy, and then I’ll leave youalone. Perkins: Well, what can I say?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you have a philosophy? Perkins: I have given a reasonable amount of money away, but it’s not part of a grandscheme. I don’t think I’ve had a grand philanthropic scheme. When my latewife was with me we gave quite a bit of money to the ballet.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because she liked it? Perkins: She liked it. We were both on the board of directors, and we liked it. Andthen, after her death, I gave money to medical research in her name. I built asort of—not a memorial to her, but I built a major structure in her hometownin Norway, on which there’s a little plaque with her name on it, but it isn’tabout her.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That’s the restoration project which you talk about in your book? Perkins: Yes, right. And, then there is a Perkins Foundation—Gerd and ThomasPerkins Foundation which gives money away every year.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: To anything specific? Perkins: Well, it’s typically education and medical research, and a little bit to the balletstill, but not so much anymore. I don’t go to the ballet anymore. I just gavesome money away last weekend to the Leukemia and Lymphoma Society. AlGore came out and gave a fundraising speech at my request, and I chipped inenough money to make sure that they broke the record. But I haven’t a fullythought through philosophy.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, what you would like to say in the end, to wrap this all up? Perkins: I don’t know. You’ve been extremely patient to listen to all this.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I found it extremely interesting. Perkins: I’ll look forward to, I guess, reading the summaries of what I’ve said, andwhat everybody else has said too. I’m curious to know how my views differ, ifthey do at all, from others.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, some of the people that I have talked to would certainly be paying a lotof attention to the entrepreneur. Perkins: I think that’s right. One of our most successful companies—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you want this on tape? Perkins: Sure, it’s fine. One of our most successful companies was Acuson, and thefounder/CEO of Acuson, a guy, Dr. Sam Maslak, had never had anyone workfor him, not one person. And I said, “Let’s start with you, and if you can’t doit, we’ll have to try to find somebody that can.” And he was brilliant,absolutely brilliant. I never had to worry about anything he did inmanagement. Fantastic. I think he was absolutely amazed when he came to usfor money. He had written a business plan, and honestly it was the size of theNew York phone book. He had thought of every possibility. I went throughit—pffft, like that, high speed, in about twenty minutes, and I liked thenumbers at the back.But he didn’t explain how the technology worked, and as far as I could see, itwas just going to be another me-too product. So he came in to pitch it, and hewanted to talk about markets and all that. Instead we ended up spending twohours on the principles behind acoustical diffraction. Because of my laserbackground, I was able to think in terms of the optics of sound, which is whathe was doing. It’s an optical sound system, if you will. That’s what an70ultrasonic scanner is. Well, we spent two hours, and I was persuaded he had abreakthrough idea, which he had not explained at all in his business plan. Hejust assumed nobody would understand it. And I said, “Hey! We’ll do it. Andhe said, “But you haven’t read the business plan.” I said, “Well, so what! Do Ihave to?” [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All right. Well, that was great as far as I am concerned. I hope it wasn’t toorepetitive for you. Perkins: No, I love to babble; I love to babble.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I don’t call it babble. [chuckling] Anyway, I thank you.
Interviewer: It is June 9, 2009, and this is the first interview with Mr. Burt McMurtry. Mr.McMurtry, would you start way back with your grandparents on both sidesand tell me a little bit about where they were and what they did and how muchyou knew them? McMurtry: I’d be happy to. I knew one set of grandparents much better than the other, butthree of my four grandparents were living when I was born and I got to knowthem. My mother’s mother had died when my mother was nine. Mygrandfather [Burton Matteson] had remarried and had several children by thatmarriage in addition to the two sisters my mother had, and we got to knowthat family quite well. My grandfather had been an engineer working withColorado Fuel and Iron in Colorado. He was originally from upstate NewYork and was apparently a real mechanical genius, something that missed meentirely!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, really! [chuckling] McMurtry: But this is something that our son seems to have, which is delightful to see. Iremember him as a quite old man. They retired to the Rio Grande Valley ofTexas and bought a farm there and were growing fruit. We lived in Houstonand we would go down to see them periodically. I remember him as being apretty unhappy older man, really crippled up quite a lot, very bad knee troubleand arthritis, and so on. He died in 1948 when I was then thirteen, so I knewhim slightly but not well. My other grandfather [James Gilmer McMurtry, born 1870 in Judson, IN] Igot to know quite well. He had been a college professor in small colleges inthe Midwest and had ended up at Colorado College in Colorado Springs. Hetaught philosophy and Greek and Latin and German.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: My heavens! McMurtry: And other interesting things. He finished his career at Colorado College andthen retired in 1938. He was born in 1870 and retired in 1938 and they movedalso to Texas, where my parents were living in Houston, although they movedto Lufkin, a small town north of Houston. He became a Presbyterian ministerin his retirement and he did that for a number of years. My grandmother diedin 1943, and in 1945 our grandfather, my father’s father, moved to Houstonand lived with us from 1945 until he died in 1953. During that time he wasessentially helping with churches around southeast Texas. But my brother [James G. McMurtry III] and I got to know him quite well, which waswonderful. He was a very learned guy, and we would read our Latin lessonswith him and that was great fun, a great education. He would also point out tous what book this particular passage came from and how it related to otherthings that were going on historically. It was really delightful; I wish I hadmade some notes or remembered more of it, but it was fun that he wasknowledgeable and easy to be around. So that’s a lot of what I remember about both sets of grandparents, although Ishould go back briefly to Mr. Matteson, M-A-T-T-E-S-O-N [spells] BurtonMatteson, for whom I’m named. I mentioned he was a crippled, old man.About twenty years ago, I had an attack of gout—really bad stuff. It typicallyhits the ball joint of the big toe, and what happens is uric acid levels get toohigh in your blood, the uric acid precipitates out on the smoothest joints inyour body—that’s one of the smoothest—and it forms like sandpaper, whichis what produces the extreme pain. Not good stuff. My three-year-olderbrother had gotten gout about three years earlier. My father was still livingand we asked him, “Where did this gout come from?” And he said, “I have noidea—Oh! Mr. Matteson had very serious gout, and in fact what he had—hewas crippled with gout.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh was that it? McMurtry: And yet nowadays there’s a pill that most people can take called allopurinol,which you take once a day, has no other side effects, and it keeps your uricacid levels in complete control.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Amazing. So there must be a genetic tendency. McMurtry: Totally, oh yes. One of the main things that is known about that disease is it ishighly genetically transmitted.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because the image that you get way back, with the King Georges or whoever,was high living. [chuckling] McMurtry: Yes, exactly, that’s right. And a lot of that, it turns out, has been discredited,which I’m very pleased to hear about!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] You don’t want to be accused of that! McMurtry: [chuckling] Although we grew up drinking absolutely nothing, after we cameto California and discovered wine, we really got into wine, and so we drink a lot of wine! I’d really like not to have to give up drinking wine. That would beunfortunate.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, then—let’s go to your parents. How did you end up in Texas, or wheredid they start, maybe, is the question. McMurtry: They started in Colorado Springs. My father, James G. McMurtry, Jr. wasliving there; my mother, Alberta Elizabeth Matteson McMurtry was living inPueblo, Colorado. She came to Colorado College in the same freshman classas my father, and they met at Colorado College and became engaged and weremarried just after graduating from Colorado College. Actually, they married ayear later; they graduated in 1925, married in 1926. My father had trained as ahard rock geologist at Colorado College, but when he finished college, therewere really no jobs available for hard rock geologists.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that the Depression? McMurtry: No. It was pre-Depression but there was not much demand. My mother hadtrained as an English major and as a teacher, and so she taught school for awhile and then they were married and she taught after they were married. Myfather did some odd jobs here and there and then in 1928 he got a job inHouston working with what I call “Umble” Oil and Refining Company, H-UM-B-L-E [spells]. If you’re from Southeast Texas you don’t pronounced theinitial H on a word. I found that out many years ago in a funny way, so peoplewho are from Houston say they’re from Uston. I’ve learned to say Houstonbecause it got confused earlier in another context.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Or if you listen to the BBC, they say Hooston. McMurtry: Hooston, that’s right, or Howston. But my father and mother moved to Texasin 1928, and he had several jobs during the early part of the Depression. Buthe kept his job with [H]umble Oil, which was mainly sort of an accountingand paralegal-type job; it had nothing to do with the geology that he wastrained in.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that a disappointment to him? McMurtry: I think yes and no. He would have liked to have used his geology training, butit was not the passion for him that some people develop about scientificendeavors. So they were in Houston; we grew up in the southwest part of thecity. I have an older brother who’s three-years older than I who just retired several years ago as a neurosurgeon at Columbia Presbyterian Medical Centerin New York and taught at Columbia for many, many years.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You don’t have a trace of a Texan accent that I can detect. McMurtry: That is strange, and my brother and I sound alike. We thought for a while itmay have been a high school speech teacher we had, but I have a lot of goodfriends from high school who took from the same speech teacher who havepretty significant accents.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So there goes that hypothesis! [chuckling] McMurtry: Hard to know what produced that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I was wondering if you would have one, and whether part of being acceptedon the West Coast was dropping your Texan accent, but it doesn’t sound thatway. McMurtry: No, I’ve never been conscious of that at all.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Give me a feeling of what it was like to grow up in your family household. McMurtry: We had a very comfortable childhood. Our family was very middle class.There was certainly no abundance, but we were never raised thinking that wewere poor. That’s pretty interesting looking back on it, because my fathernever made more than $10,000 a year in his entire life, and he was makingthat near the time that he retired in the late sixties. And so you’ve got to factorinflation into all that, but still, it’s pretty striking that we could have had avery comfortable home.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And your mother was no longer working? McMurtry: My mother, no, she did not work after she started having children. She was afull-time mom and very influential with us in that she really managed toconvey to my brother and me a bunch of things. You had to be veryresponsible and all those good things, but also, she conveyed to us that in heropinion, which we valued, we could do just about anything we set out to do.There were no limits, and if you think about what you would like to impart toyour children, it is this concept of no limits coupled with responsibility and accountability and expectations that have to be in bounds, to some degree, butnot really constrained.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Where did she get that orientation? McMurtry: I don’t know where she got it, but it was deeply ingrained and came across tous as, I would say, total encouragement as opposed to elevated expectations. Itwas not a matter of—boy, am I going to be unhappy if you don’t achieve this,that, or the other. Or am I going to be unhappy if you don’t achieve what Iknow you can do. It was never that, it was all—you just decide what you wantto do and then set out to do it, and the chances are very good that you canmake it happen. Our father was by nature, I would say, a pessimist—a good-natured pessimist.He’d had some setbacks from not being able to get a job out of college, andthen had begun his family. Actually, he didn’t begin the family until right inthe Depression, and was exposed to a lot of uncertainty over the years andwas, by nature, pessimistic. My mother was, by nature, optimistic. Not a veryoutgoing person, in fact, rather shy and reticent, but fundamentally optimistic.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was there a lot of social activity? Were people in and out of the house? Orwas it a more nuclear family? McMurtry: There was some activity with distant relatives who lived in the area, and witha few other families who were friends of my parents, friends of my father’sfrom work and friends of my mother’s from some of the volunteer activitythat she was doing. And they had become friends with the parents of some ofthe classmates of my brother and mine. So we had a fair amount of socialactivity. One of my mother’s stepsisters came to live with us in the earlyforties, I think, after she graduated from high school and went to work as aclerk/stenographer or something for a local company and lived with us at ourlittle house in Houston, and so we got to know her pretty well over the years.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That’s a second generation doing that. McMurtry: Right, right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And did you go to public schools? McMurtry: Yes, we went to public schools. To the West University Elementary Schooland Pershing Junior High School and then Lamar High School, all in thesouthwest part of Houston. We were extremely fortunate because those were, by far, the best schools in Houston at the time. There were two good highschools, really good high schools—one was Lamar, and also San Jacinto HighSchool was quite good and the surrounding feeder schools were pretty good.But the schools were remarkably good. The quality of public education wewere treated to was really phenomenal and something we’re grateful for.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What were you becoming interested in in school? I mean was there an area? McMurtry: In school I was very interested in math and in science, particularly in the hardsciences—physics and chemistry much more than in biology, which neverparticularly interested me, which is very different from my brother. But I gotinterested in those things, but I was also interested in literature and I just gotvery committed to learning in late junior high school and in high school. Wewere blessed with some really good teachers who would challenge us andpush us pretty hard, and it was fun to try to achieve. So I was interested intrying to be a really good student and I got very interested in football in juniorhigh school and through high school, and that was a major passion and also—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Actually playing it, you mean? McMurtry: Oh yes, in fact I was an offensive guard and a defensive tackle, whichnowadays would require about 100 more pounds than I ever had, but I was bigat the time. I was in junior high school 160 pounds, and in high school I was6’1” and 180, which in those days was a big person so you could compete.There were bigger people but there were not the giants that there are today.But football was a great, great passion.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What about your brother? Was he blazing a path that you felt you had tofollow in any way? McMurtry: No, that’s a very appropriate question. I think some meaningful amount of thecredit for whatever I was able to accomplish in school was related to the factthat I would show up in a classroom, and beginning from elementary schoolon the teacher would say, “Oh, you’re Jimmy McMurtry’s brother!” And Iremember from the earliest stage sort of thinking under my breath—you’redamn right I am! And I’m going to do really well! And the idea for me—themotivation was to try to do better than he had done; and he had done very,very well. But it was a wonderful motivation, and I was very pleased that he—that’s one of the many things that older children do for younger children—training their parents and setting expectations and guidelines for the youngerkids as well. So it was really very helpful to do that.  My brother and I had a very good and different relationship, in that he’s threeyears older and, from the earliest time I can remember, thought that the idea ofarguing with or fighting with his younger brother was something about whichhe had less than zero interest. So he was totally non-combative, nonargumentative, highly dismissal of any attempts to be argumentative orrambunctious. And it was, I have to say, frustrating for me, because I wasmuch more aggressive by nature.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] You couldn’t get a rise out of him! McMurtry: I couldn’t at all! And so it was, actually, a pretty good education in learninghow to deal with people of that approach to life.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And are those very simple sketches of your two personalities—did they holdpretty well? I mean, is he still very even, and you’re a little feisty? McMurtry: That’s a good question. I would say they probably hold to some extent, buthe’s very outgoing and has very broad interests, and in addition to being asuperb neurosurgeon and teacher has developed a whole range of hobbies andactivities and interests that are very impressive. He the day after tomorrowwill be 77 years old and he’s a lifelong bachelor.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Really? McMurtry: Neurosurgery didn’t give him much time for anything. But he’s had a lot oftime to get very involved with opera and with antique furniture and with navalhistory and all kinds of other things.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Would you say that you’re close to him? McMurtry: I think we’ve always been close. Probably not the way some siblings would beobserved to be close, because we’ve never lived in the same place since 1957.But we see each other fairly regularly and have always enjoyed each other.It’s a very comfortable—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You’re lucky people. McMurtry: We’re very lucky people. There was the sibling rivalry on my part, in thesense that I knew people had expectations, and I did not want to do less wellthan my brother had done. And that was a great incentive for me. I think he never felt really challenged by me in any meaningful way, but I think was infact pleased at what I was able to accomplish, and I’ve been very pleased atwhat he’s been able to accomplish. I think probably people observing uswould say that each of us is pretty understated. That may be a reasonabledescription.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is that something that maybe came from the family? That you don’t broadcastyour virtues? McMurtry: Yes, I think very much so, very much so, yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So is the next stage Rice University? McMurtry: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And was that an inevitable choice? Did you look anywhere else? McMurtry: I didn’t look anywhere else. Again, this was the fifties, and if you grew up inHouston in the fifties and were from a local family—that is, maybe a newlylocal family, the fact that Rice existed and had zero tuition and was known tobe a high-quality school and a small school—meant that if you could getadmission to Rice, you generally tried to do that. About the only people whohad performed well academically in Houston that I knew who went elsewherewere people whose families had histories at Harvard or at Princeton or Yale orone of the other typically East Coast schools. But in my case it was logical tothink about going to Rice; I was interested in math and science and thoughtthat electrical engineering sounded like a reasonable thing to study.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: These were all fields in which Rice was strong. McMurtry: Fields in which Rice was strong, that’s right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How could Rice offer free tuition? McMurtry: They had a substantial endowment left by William Marsh Rice who had beena very successful businessman in Houston. He had come originally fromMassachusetts to Houston, and then as he was retiring decided to give hisfortune to establish a university. It was chartered in 1891 but not officiallyopened until 1912. There’s a long story about that because he was actuallymurdered in New York and the estate thrown in—it was a very complicated thing. But the school was kept small. There were only 1600 undergraduatestotal when we were at Rice.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Your brother went too. McMurtry: My brother went two years ahead of me, actually, because I skipped— Let’sgo back to that for just a second. I skipped my last half year of high school,which was one of the weirdest decisions I’ve ever made. I look back on it, I’mvery glad I did it, but I wonder how I managed to make the decision. As I said,I loved football and was very much involved with that and with academics. Iwas planning to graduate in January of 1953, but in the fall of ’52, after theuntil September of ’53 to start Rice. If I took extra courses in the spring andtook some summer courses, I could finish high school in August and start Ricein September. But that meant giving up my senior year of high schoolfootball, where I would have played absolutely all the time and had a greattime, but I somehow decided to do that and that put me on a path to be in theclass that finished Rice in 1952 instead of in 1953.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You also missed graduating with your class. McMurtry: Missed graduating with the class, that’s right. A couple of us who wereinvited, who had done well academically, were invited to sit in with the classwhen they graduated, but we didn’t. We didn’t get to do it till the summer, butit turned out to be a good decision.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now did you live at home? McMurtry: Lived at home, lived at home the whole time that I was at Rice, all four yearsat Rice.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that rather common? Was there a preponderance of Texans? McMurtry: At that time, yes, I bet 70 percent of the students at Rice were from Texas. Iwould guess, half or maybe a little more than half the students were living onthe campus, but certainly no more than half.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you didn’t feel a fish out of water.  McMurtry: No, it was very comfortable, and we got very involved with student activities.You spent most of your time there; the campus was only two miles away andwe got back and forth quite easily. My wife Deedee [née Meck] and I hadmet, actually, in high school. She was in the class that I ended up graduatingwith and had decided to come to Rice and was going to study Romancelanguages. We dated a little bit as freshmen, but then started dating again assophomores at Rice and then continued dating and became engaged and weremarried a week after we both graduated from Rice in June of 1956—in fact,53 years ago today was the date we were married. Exciting.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is that so! Definitely, congratulations. McMurtry: And then I had to go back for a fifth year because at that time Rice required itsengineers to go five years to get a BS degree. You went four years to get a BAdegree; your fifth year was all engineering; you got a BS degree. They feltthat that wasn’t a terrible burden for the students because it gave them abroader education, and since there was zero tuition from 1912 to 1965, theyfelt it was fine. It was delightful for me because you were permitted to takelots of courses outside of the engineering field. You got a lot of engineering,all kinds of engineering and physics and math and chemistry, but as anexample, the first electrical engineering course I took, which was my major,the first course I took from that department was a one-semester course in thesecond semester of my third year, which is a remarkable breadth for someonewho is studying that focused and—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Really! Yes, it’s not what you think of happening to an engineering student. McMurtry: I know. Nowadays it’s shifted back so that they have to cram it all in fouryears and there’s a lot of competition to do that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I don’t want to go there quite yet, but we do know that you are going to endup in engineering. McMurtry: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And was that in any way a handicap to have— McMurtry: Not at all. I think it was more of an advantage to have more formal training inby the time you got started. I didn’t know much about engineering, eventhough I was taking engineering at Rice.  The only jobs I’d had working in the summer were jobs working as a laborerin the oil fields, and that turned out to be really good for me because it wasextremely hard physical work. It also was really good for a kid who was doingvery well in school and who, as a result, thought of himself as beingreasonably smart. But to be faced with major construction-type jobs, dealingwith equipment, really practical problems, I found out— I started working inthe oil fields from the age of fifteen, working on a pipe-checking crew, and soon. I discovered very early that I lacked a lot of common sense. [<|endoftext|>
Interviewerchuckles] I just did not have the common sense that a number of my full-timecoworkers had.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because you hadn’t been out in the world doing things in the way that theywere? McMurtry: No, no. I’d been sheltered in school, but it was a fabulous education to workfull-time as a laborer. I worked on a pipe-checking crew, then I worked acouple summers in a refinery—very, very heavy-duty work, gigantic amountsof huge pipe—we were having six-foot pipe wrenches and things that you,hard to imagine— But again it was wonderful because it was fabulousphysical exercise and it was very different from hitting the books, buttremendously educational because you learned a lot about how to do things ina practical way.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, go back to your decision that engineering was it, that you were going tomajor in engineering. You said that you liked math and you liked the physicalsciences, and I can see how that’s related, but there were other ways you couldhave gone. McMurtry: There were other ways. I think I was influenced toward engineering by acouple of things. One, my grandfather on my mother’s side had tremendoustalents in that arena. His son, my mother’s stepbrother, was an engineer andworked and again had his father’s talent for building things. It’s almosthearsay. If you’re good in math and science, and you go to school and you goto Rice—it’s local and it’s free and it’s good—and you just do that. I doremember early on, it was clear to me when I got to Rice that my math skillshad been good through high school—they were going to be really strained atRice. It was pretty clear to me I was not going to be anything like a mathmajor, but not because I couldn’t do it, but because it was obviously not acalling for me. I loved physics, but I looked around at the relatively few people in our classand other people at Rice who were physics majors, and a lot of them werehighly introverted people who were—some interesting and some less interesting. But I remember thinking to myself, as I did the casual thinkingabout majors, that if that’s what a physicist is, I must not be one. Although it was interesting as I went through my training, and particularlyafter finishing the fourth year at Rice—Deedee and I were married—and I gota summer job with GE in Schenectady. So we drove up there, spent thesummer, and I worked in a microwave tube lab, the first time I’d been in realengineering work. I worked in a microwave tube lab and then also in aresearch lab and found that work fascinating and decided I really wanted totry to work in that field. I then spent the next year looking for an opportunityto work in that field and to come to graduate school at Stanford, which I hadlearned had the best graduate programs in that field, in the country, in theopinion of the people at GE with whom I was talking. That’s a long story, butI did in fact stumble out here.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, well, I want to hear it. But is there more to say about Rice? For onething, I know that you ended up being student body president. McMurtry: Yes. We got involved in student politics mainly because my wife Deedee hadbeen—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But she’s not your wife yet, is she? McMurtry: My girlfriend had been vice president of the sophomore class, and then in herjunior year she decided to run for secretary of the student association andencouraged me to think about running for treasurer. So I ran for treasurer andwas elected treasurer of the student association, and then leading into ourfourth year, we both decided to run for president and vice-president of thestudent association. And we were both elected to do that, so that was greatfun, so we were very involved with—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, very involved and very popular, I would think. Is that indeed true? McMurtry: Yes. Deedee was highly popular, and I was probably more well known thanhighly popular.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] You mean that feistiness came out? McMurtry: No, I’m not sure; I’m not sure. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, what else to say about Rice? Because I know the connections continue,so that you must feel very strongly about the place. McMurtry: Oh we both feel strongly about the Rice experience; it was a tremendouseducation and a lot of great people and the fellow students and the faculty andthe administration. I had the privilege of getting to know some trustees of Riceat that time, because when I was a junior, a committee was put together oftrustees, administration, faculty, students, and staff, to look at trying torationalize the dormitory system at Rice. At that time Rice had four men’sdormitories, and the general way things worked was it was a very AnimalHouse-type environment, typical of a lot of schools at that time. And therewere no women’s dormitories, even though I think we had 1600 people in theschool when we were there, and I think only 400 or 500 of them were women,maybe 400 were women, so it was very unbalanced.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that policy? McMurtry: No, the women had been admitted from the very first class, but I think theremust have been a policy to keep the number of women very much in theminority. Rice had no housing for women; they had some apartments that theyleased ten blocks away, which is where the women lived who were living “oncampus.” But this committee got put together and met for about a year and ahalf. Part of the committee went out to Caltech to look at the system of housesthat they have; part of the committee went to Yale and looked at what theydid. The committee did a lot of reading about what other universities did—theBritish system and lots of others. I was one of the four or five students on thatcommittee, but it gave me a chance to interact with some very interestingpeople in the administration, other faculty members I didn’t know well, andparticularly a couple of trustees—Herbert [C.] Allen and Newton Rayzor, whoturned out to be very influential in a lot of things. The recommendation of the committee was to establish what’s called acollege system, in which the colleges are not academic units but individualliving units where the students are randomly assigned from all the classes, andwhere there is a master, literally living in a house adjacent to the college.There is a master and family and there are resident associates from the facultywho also live with the college, with a lot of the social activity of the universityfocused on the college and competition between colleges, and so on, but withpeople from every major in every college so that it’s really mixed up. Thatwas begun in the spring of 1957, which was my fifth year at Rice, so that wegot to see the beginning of the college system. Now it’s evolved and hasevolved over the years, but has been enormously successful. One of the highlytouted features of a Rice experience is the depth and quality of the collegeexperience. We did recently provide funding for a tenth residential college at Rice; there are two new colleges being built, and we agreed to fund one ofthose. It’s literally being built as we speak.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because the student body has expanded? McMurtry: They decided to expand the student body by up to 30 percent. It began severalyears ago and we’ll be doing it for a while.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Enough on Rice? Probably you could go on forever! McMurtry: I probably could go on for a long time, but that’s probably enough.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I have two degrees listed at Rice. McMurtry: Two, yes. You got a BA degree at the end of four years and then a BS at theend of five.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. And then you went on to Stanford for two more degrees. McMurtry: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did it ever occur to you to go anywhere else? I’m imaging that Stanfordgraduate school at that point didn’t have the reputation of maybe some of theEast Coast schools. McMurtry: It turned out that in electrical engineering and physics, which were separatebut highly intertwined, Stanford had a huge reputation in the microwaveelectronics field. Russell and Sigurd Varian, who invented the klystron tube,were here. William [W.] Hansen who invented the klystron resonator and abunch of other important things was here. Hewlett and Packard had beenstudents of [Frederick] Terman’s and started their company in 1938. By this time, 1957, the graduate school of electrical engineering at Stanford,which was quite large and is still quite large, had become very prominent.Berkeley’s school, incidentally, had been prominent for a very long time andhad very good people in the microwave electronics field as well. But theadvice that I got from people in Schenectady was that Stanford was the placeto go if you could manage to get there. GE wanted me to come to work forthem, and work in Schenectady and go to school at Rensselaer Polytechnic [Institute], which is also a very good graduate school, but I decided I reallywanted to try to get out to Stanford.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because of all the reasons you just stated? McMurtry: Because of what I’d heard. I wasn’t thinking that much about going toCalifornia. I’d been to California twice only; I’d been to L.A. both times andhadn’t particularly liked it, so it was not that I had to get to California. But GEcould hire all the people they wanted. They had a microwave tube lab righthere at Stanford, but they could hire everybody they wanted locally to staffthat, and so I couldn’t get hired here. This is when I stumbled into a recruiter at Rice. In my fifth year I was helpingwith the fourth-year laboratory, left a laboratory building, left the vac[uum]lab, was walking through the area where recruiters sat, and there was onerecruiter sitting there. I was on my way home, but I wanted that recruiter tohave a good opinion of Rice. So I went over to be friendly and asked if he hadtalked to some interesting people, and he said he had and we talked a little bit.And then I said, “Does your company,” he was from Sylvania and I knew theymade light bulbs and flash bulbs—that was about all I knew. I said, “Doesyour company have any facility in California that would permit you to go towork in microwave electronics and do graduate work at Stanford at the sametime?” And he said, “I don’t know, but I think something like that may havebeen set up just in the last couple of years. I’m from New York. Let me goback and check on that.” And then he very politely said, “Who are you?” Hegave me a pencil, and I filled out an application and he took it back to NewYork. I got a call and it said, “Yes, we’ve got this program that Hewlett and Packardand the Varian Brothers had set up with Terman at Stanford.” And it was afabulous program [the Honors Cooperative Program]. If you got admitted tothe graduate school at Stanford, the companies gave you time off from work,nominally, and they did pretty much, to go to regular classes at Stanford,commute to those classes, and they paid you full pay for your job and theypaid Stanford tuition. In fact, those days they paid Stanford double tuition.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: My heavens! McMurtry: And you went to school half-time, that is, you went two courses a quarterinstead of four, but you went four quarters a year, and so in eight quarters, twoyears, you could get a master’s degree, and it was a great program.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did any other place—what about MIT, for example, which you think of beingat the top of the technological—  McMurtry: I don’t know if they had that kind of a program at that time or not.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And do you think that was Terman again? McMurtry: Absolutely. It was Terman—Terman and working with Hewlett and Packard, Iexpect, who wanted their engineers to be able to get advanced training butdidn’t want to lose them to an entire year of study.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you just thinking about the graduate program at Stanford? Or were youmaybe even aware that wonderful things were happening, and related to fieldsthat you were interested in out in the business world. I’m thinking of Fairchildand— McMurtry: No, this is just before Fairchild. Fairchild was also ’57, but it was before that.No, it turned out there was no business attraction to California. Silicon Valleywasn’t named until 1971, and all of our electronic instrumentation that weused as engineers at Rice was made by a Boston-based company calledGeneral Radio. I think we had maybe one Hewlett-Packard instrument in theentire laboratory.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that just because they were just barely getting off the ground? When wasHewlett-Packard founded? I can’t remember. McMurtry: Hewlett-Packard, established in 1938, grew slowly.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, so it’d been going for twenty years. McMurtry: Oh going a long time. They grew slowly, and then they began to get more andmore electronic instrumentation, and they didn’t become a public companyuntil 1957. That was the year they went public, and so they were known butnot widely known. General Radio was much more of a factor in electronicinstrumentation at that time. There’s another interesting story about that fromBill Hewlett, which if we have time we’ll talk about. But I wasn’t attracted tothe business; I was attracted to a very high-quality graduate program inelectrical engineering and the opportunity to go to work in the microwavetube field and learn about that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh I can see that.  McMurtry: And to be paid at the same time. I had to find a place where I could go tograduate school and be compensated for it because we had absolutely nomoney. I’d made some money in the summers; I could make $1000 a summerin the oil fields and had generally consumed that in covering a lot of my ownexpenses over the years, so it was important to—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you have children yet? McMurtry: No, we were married in ’56, and when we moved out here Deedee waspregnant with our daughter who was born on October 30 of 1957. And so Istarted Stanford in September of ’57, our daughter Cathryn Ann McMurtrywas born in October of ’57, our son John Eric McMurtry was born inDecember of 1960. I got my master’s degree in the summer of ’59, the PhD inthe summer of ’62, and I was working full-time. And Deedee was really asingle parent during that time.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You weren’t changing too many diapers, were you? McMurtry: It was unbelievable—but tremendously wonderful, fabulous educationalquality, fabulous work opportunity.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, are there people that stand out in that engineering program at Stanford? McMurtry: Oh yes, there are many. There’s a man named Tony [Anthony E.] Siegman, SI-E-G-M-A-N [spells] who was a young assistant professor at Stanford in themicrowave tube field when I joined, had been a student of Dean [A.] Watkins,who later started Watkins-Johnson Company, and who’s a very prominentengineer, and Dean was a professor at Stanford. Marvin Chodorow was aprofessor at Stanford. There were really some very first-rate people.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And you rubbed shoulders with these people? McMurtry: Yes, yes, got to know them, had an opportunity to take classes from them, andit was delightful.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you beginning to figure out where you were going to go with all this? McMurtry: I was beginning to figure it out. I had loved the microwave tube field andworked in that field for a number of years. And then when I was looking for aPhD problem, Tony Siegman had an idea for a device. The laser had just been invented in 1960, and so there were some ideas about how would youmodulate a laser beam, that is, how would you encode information on a laserbeam, send it someplace else, and then demodulate it. That is, get theinformation off the laser beam back into the form that you want to use it,whether it’s a picture or sound or whatever. And Tony had an idea for ademodulator that would be a microwave tube with a photo cathode, and so on,and wanted me to pursue that. I didn’t really want to pursue that because itwas interesting but it was too much like what I really knew a lot about doing,and I wanted to work on something totally different. I had built a laser so Ihad a laser that I could use, but Tony really wanted me to try to do that, and itforced me to think of a way to demonstrate whether or not that would workwithout having to build anything new. It was wonderful that I was able to do that, because I remembered somethingfrom Terman’s radioengineering book [Electronic and Radio Engineering]that said that almost all cathodes, the things that emit electrons in travelingwave tubes, in any kind of tube, most of them have some photoelectric effect.That is, if you hit the cathode with light, some electrons will come off. And soyou don’t have to put a photo cathode in a tube; you might be able to use anordinary cathode and therefore wouldn’t have to build anything, which wouldbe great.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because that’s time consuming and— McMurtry: Oh yes, it would have been very time consuming. And later on I found out wewould have been beaten to the punch by some people at Bell Labs who werein fact doing that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh really, if you’d stopped to make the equipment. McMurtry: If I’d done it the conventional way.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because Bell Labs is another place where things like that are happening, is itnot? McMurtry: Bell Labs was the premier research institution in the world, I would say, atthat time.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I associate Charles [H.] Townes with the laser. Was he at Bell at that point? McMurtry: He was at Bell Labs; he was teaching at Columbia and he was a consultant atBell Labs. And Arthur [L.] Schawlow— <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right, both Nobel laureates now. McMurtry: —two Nobel laureates, brothers-in-law.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Are they? Oh I didn’t know that. McMurtry: Yes. Arthur died a decade ago or more, but Charles is still around.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh yes, we have a long oral history with him. McMurtry: Oh, I’ll bet you do. He’s a fabulous guy. So I figured I could use this microwave tube I already had, and I had a bunchof traveling wave tubes. The problem was how do you modulate the light soyou can demodulate it? Well, it turned out that was going to be a complicatedthing to do as well, but it was pretty clear how to do it, you just had to taketime to do it. But it occurred to me that maybe the laser I had built already,which was a ruby laser, might be able to do the job. It’s a little complicated,but not too complicated. When you modulate or put information on a lightbeam or anything, you create what are called sidebands, that is you putinformation, the information goes in different places, and because theinformation goes in different places within the frequency spectrum—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: On the beam? McMurtry: Yes, on the beam, on the beam. It’s all on the beam. But you move thefrequency stuff around a little bit and the amplitudes, and because you movestuff around in the spectrum that is being emitted by this thing, if you knowwhat the code is you can go in and strip that stuff off, but you’re stripping offwhat are typical of sidebands, which are just different oscillations, oscillationsat different frequencies.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you’re going to have a whole bunch of information on the same beam? McMurtry: Yes. And what occurred to me was that the ruby laser, which is about thatlong [indicating size] had a natural resonance frequency that would cause it tohave sidebands in the microwave region, that is a few gigahertz, a few times hertz oscillation frequency. And yet it was “known” by the gurus of thefield that ruby lasers did not oscillate more than one frequency at one time,because ruby is a “homogeneously broadened medium,” which means once 20you get enough energy to start a laser action, then it sucks all the other energyinto that frequency and will only oscillate there. I’d been to a semi-private conference with some other Stanford guys andpeople from around the country, around the world, a month earlier and hadseen a spectrograph that some people had taken of a ruby laser. And this rubylaser spectrograph, which doesn’t say anything about the time, it just says thatall the stuff that came out of the ruby laser in this five-minute exposure, theywere different frequencies. But the people who gave the paper said, “But it’sclear it’s not more than one of these frequencies at a time, because what’shappening is the ruby rod is heating up. As it heats up it changes the naturalfrequency,” and sort of bang goes over into another one and then into anotherone and then— So that was understood, but I thought, what if they’re wrong? What if there’smore than one of these things going at the same time? Then in the laser I’vealready got, I’ve got multiple oscillations as if I had modulated the beam,without building the modulator. And at the other end, I may have a microwavephototube without having to build a phototube, because it’s an ordinarytraveling wave tube. And so I took this apparatus—I had the laser at Stanford; I was working atStanford. I took the laser from Stanford back down to the plant in MountainView, and in a highly illegal manner— It was a plant shutdown, so there wasnobody in the plant, and so I went in and set up this experiment, and thetraveling wave tube, it was using a 20,000 volt power supply, a very highenergy 20,000 volt power supply which you’re not allowed with other peoplearound. But if you’re careful— So anyway, I went in and started running theseexperiments and it worked like a charm! I mean this thing—it was going atmultiple frequencies all the time and very strong signals. So I called Tony, I called Siegman, and said, “I’m through!” And he said,“You’re what?” I said, “I’m through. You’ve got to come see something!”And so he drove down and was really ecstatic because it was a proof ofprinciple of something very important, well, very important— somethinguseful. I wasn’t through, of course, because then what I had was that themicrowave phototube was a device to study the spectral characteristics of rubylasers. And so I spent the next year using that device to study the spectralcharacteristics of ruby lasers with different doping levels, and actually not thatmuch as just with different temperatures and things of that kind.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And that was your dissertation? McMurtry: That was the dissertation. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, maybe we’d better stop there. Linda’s going to change a tape.[interruption in recording][End Audio File 1]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What we haven’t really talked about is what you were doing at Sylvania. Theywere in Mountain View? McMurtry: Yes, they were in Mountain View. They had two facilities in Mountain View.One was a microwave tube laboratory where I was working, and one wascalled the Electronic Defense Laboratories, which around that time was beingled by Bill [William J.] Perry, the former defense secretary who was also aprofessor at Stanford and a resident there in the complex. Perry was there, andI was in the microwave tube laboratory. From ’57 to ’62, I was working as anengineer on traveling wave tubes and backward-wave oscillators andwonderful electronic devices. And then I stumbled into the laser field, as Imentioned, when the laser was invented, and then because I had stumbled intoit, there was very interesting research to be done surrounding these microwaveoptical devices—laser devices. And so I went back to Sylvania, which hadbecome General Telephone and Electronics. General Telephone boughton. And in ’62, after I finished at Stanford, I went back and set up a smallgroup doing government-funded research in laser and microwave R&D.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that militarily oriented? McMurtry: Military—it was all air force or army.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you need clearance for that? McMurtry: Oh yes, you had to have clearances, and some of the work that we wereinvolved with in the microwave laboratory we needed top secret clearances,but it very seldom really needed that. In ’63 I went back to GTE and GTESylvania and set up this little group doing research and got very involved inresearch in laser/microwave-related things and built up a group called theElectro-optics Organization there, and had been building that and wasenjoying managing a small group but doing a lot of research. In 1963, GTEdecided to divest itself of the microwave tube business. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why? McMurtry: It was just not very profitable at that time, and the major peak of governmentfunding for that type of thing had passed. So they decided to divest and so atthat time I was faced with the question of what do you do? And one prospectwas to take the small group I had put together that had government fundingand set that up as a separate company.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And you could have done that? McMurtry: I could have done that and they would have blessed me to do that becausewhat I was doing was not critical to where they wanted to go.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. So they would have been as glad to spin it off. McMurtry: They would have been very comfortable with that. Another opportunity was togo back East to one of the other GTE facilities with whom I had a lot ofinteractions, and my bosses’ boss[es] were back there. So I looked at that. Andthe third opportunity was presented by Bill Perry who was then running theElectronic Defense Laboratories. He said, “Why don’t you bring your groupintact into our laboratories and expand the work to be a little more orientedtoward,” as opposed to device work which we were doing, “more orientedtoward government systems? And we’ll help you get some business in thatrelated area.” And after a long series of conversations with everybody, I endedup deciding not to take them out as a separate company, which was a goodidea that I didn’t because we didn’t have the basis for a— We were aconstructive group of people capable of doing research that other peoplefunded, but we were not—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Not running a business. McMurtry: That was not really a business in the sense of something that can generate a lotof capital. And I decided not to move back East, and took Bill Perry’s offer tocome over and move the group to [EDL].<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And not moving back East, was that a regional decision? McMurtry: The work would have been very similar, but there was a lot less disruption,because I’d put a lot of effort into getting the group together and really wantedto keep it together and probably wouldn’t have moved the entire group. There’s just a lot of dislocation in that. Also by that time we’d been heresince ’57, and six years it had been; we really liked it here!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, you changed your ideas about California. McMurtry: We were beginning to have some roots and really had a lot of relationships,business relationships and university relationships, and we wanted to stayclose. There were two small items related to that that ought to be mentioned.One was quite a shock. We moved the group over on January 1, 1964 andtransferred all the stuff, and on January 10 of 1964 Bill Perry called me and hesaid, “Burton, I need to talk to you about something.” So I went over to seehim and he said, “Burt, for a whole host of reasons, several of us have decidedthat we are going to be leaving GTE and setting up an independent companyin the electronic intelligence field,” which was his specialty, “and it’s going tobe called Electromagnetic Systems Laboratory, ESL,” which he and threeother GTE managers decided to do. And I was in shock because I had justmoved over there to work for Bill and now Bill was saying, “I’m out of here.”But then he was out of there and they went on to make that a very successfulcompany.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that a real break with GTE? McMurtry: Totally, oh totally. It was like the Fairchild founders leaving Shockley or theother guys leaving Fairchild, so it was a big break but they made it verysuccessful. And so I had to figure out how to make that work, and it workedfine, and I was with them for another five years until June of ’69. The other related story, a little longer but it’s worth mentioning is—Imentioned that I had developed a good relationship with two trustees of Ricein Houston—Herbert Allen who was the head of Cameron Iron Works, theparent of Brown & Root, who was a very interesting guy, and Newton Rayzor,who was an attorney in Houston, particularly in maritime law but had beenvery prominent. I knew him better than I knew Allen, but I knew them bothreasonably. I went back to Houston when I was thinking about whether to start a companyor not. I would need some money, and I figured I would need maybe as muchas $350,000 of external capital to be able to make this whole thing work. Andso I went back to Houston and went to see Mr. Rayzor at his home. Because Ireally hadn’t been in touch with him since graduating, I told him what I’dbeen up to and what I was thinking about doing. We had this very pleasantconversation and he asked me some questions. Then at the end of theconversation he said, “Well, Burton, I would be interested to hear what you decide to do about this. If you decide you want to start a company then myfamily and I would very much like to provide the financing to do it.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Just like that! You must have been impressive. McMurtry: Well, it was really impressive and it was highly empowering because it meantthe financing aspect was not some insurmountable mountain but wassomething that could be done. That permitted me to stop thinking about howwould you surmount the mountain and thinking, is this something I reallywant to do? Does it make sense to do this? And after thinking that throughpretty thoroughly decided no, and so I thanked him for the offer and told himwhat we were, in fact, deciding to do. And I didn’t really see him againuntil— This was ’63-’64. He must have died in the seventies. Mr. Allen wasaround for many years. I got to know him when I went on the Rice board in1986 or 1987. Allen was an emeritus trustee but still around in Houston, andso I got to spend a lot of time with him over the last years of his life.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But there’s a lot of years going by in which you’re not in touch and it seems tome that the Rice lifeline is pretty strong. McMurtry: It’s very strong. I don’t understand the psychology—but I think a lot of it hasto do with the institution being relatively small to begin with, so you did knowa lot of people and were known by a lot of people and could know a lot ofpeople at different levels. I got to know a lot of faculty members from whom Inever had classes but just were able to get to know. I was given a chance toknow these trustees and just felt comfortable approaching them. I think it’ssomething that happens with every great school and university; the bonds arepretty strong. You’re willing to give people the benefit of the doubt aboutalmost anything.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You have a Rice connection even here, and I get that from the paper that yougave. McMurtry: Yes, yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: There’s an inordinate number of Rice graduates who took the same trajectory,maybe for different reasons, to Silicon Valley. McMurtry: Well, I had something to do with that. It was fun. After we got out here andfound out how interesting the work was. And this paid educational experienceat Stanford was fabulous. I went back and started recruiting at Rice in 1958. Ipersonally went back and recruited primarily from the class of electrical engineers, fifth-year engineers. There were eighteen to twenty-four students ina class, and we would get a third to a quarter of the graduating class to cometo GTE. In the first year it was the microwave device lab for a couple of yearsand then strictly in the Electronic Defense Lab. And they’d come to GTE andgo to graduate school at Stanford. And so that’s really what led to thebeginning of a flow.And also, a number of people at Stanford in the late fifties/early sixtiesdiscovered the Stanford Business School. And so people like Tom Kelley anda number of other people came out to the business school and it started moreof a flow. There has always, since then, been a strong flow of Riceundergraduates who come to graduate school at Stanford, either inengineering or in business or in other fields. One of the first successful companies I was associated with was ROLMCorporation, R-O-L-M [spells] which was a very prominenttelecommunications company started in the late sixties and was named forGene Richeson, Ken [M. Kenneth] Oshman, Walter Loewenstern, [Jr.] andBob [Robert R.] Maxfield. And I had hired three of the four at different times.Actually Ken Oshman and Richeson had been classmates, and I’d hiredLowenstern earlier and tried like crazy to hire Maxfield, who was the top guyin the class after Oshman’s class but he went to IBM instead which made mevery unhappy. [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Your Rice connections are certainly paying off, aren’t they? McMurtry: The Rice connections are strong. That’s right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So the next step, and you correct me please—are you leaping off into thebeginnings of venture capital? I’m thinking of the Palo Alto InvestmentCompany? McMurtry: Well, actually, from ’64, January ’64 when I moved the group over to EDL,until pretty much through much of ’68, I was steaming along doing laser andlaser systems-related research and development and building a group andto ’67. I was still doing some research myself but also managing a smallgroup, but never more than fifty people or something like that. But then in ’67, I was asked if I would take a job running the EquipmentEngineering Laboratory for EDL, the group that I was a part of. But we were afunny little part doing laser stuff and this was the main business. I was askedif I would take over as manager of this group. I really wasn’t very interested init; it was a big job and a hard job because they’d lost a lot of their key people in the last couple of years because Perry’s company had been very successfuland was still hiring good people out of GTE. Also I liked what I was doing.But after the third time I was asked to do it—I was asked by my boss’s boss ifI would step in and run the Equipment Engineering Laboratory, and he said itwas important to him personally that I do that. About that time, even thedensest people get the idea that this is something they really want you to do,and if you don’t do it you’re making a statement that you better be prepared tomake if you really don’t want to do it, but you probably ought to think aboutdoing this. And so I agreed to do it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: With some reluctance? McMurtry: Yes, but having once— I think this may have come from our mother as well—I think I’ve always been able to convince myself that I like doing what I’mdoing, almost all the time. And I think the rationale is you’re probably goingto do a lot better job if you think you like it than if you think it’s a lot of workand I’ll do this just as long as I have to do it. I sort of go into everything as ifit’s all I’m ever going to be doing. So I took that attitude toward that job, and it was a mess. There were 400people, 400 employees, they’d lost a lot of key people recently and over theyears, and they had really been quite badly led, almost not led at all. And I hadnever managed anything big and didn’t have many good ideas about how todo it other than some common sense, a lot of which evolved more from my oilfield experiences with people than they did from any theory about how youmanage something, because I’d never read any of that. So I started workingwith the people and found that, fortunately, the group still had anexceptionally large number of very talented people, but they’d been badly led. And so I started trying to figure out who were the potential leaders amongthem who could be given more responsibility, and how could we attract someother people as leaders from the outside, to help put this together. And so Iworked on it really intensely, and the organization had to grow. The companyhad won a lot of new business, so they had commitments for products theyneeded to be able to make, engineer, deliver, and maintain. So the groupneeded to grow from 400 people to 500 in the period of about a year, andfigure out how to get projects back on schedule and so on. It was a nightmarebut a really useful experience for somebody who needed to know somethingabout real business.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And I imagine for later on. McMurtry: And for later on it was really valuable. And so I did that and brought a coupleof people in from the outside, promoted people internally, and had the most delightful experience in that I think fifteen months later the group was runningreally well. My boss, who had been my boss’s boss, was very happy withwhat was there and I said, “Would it be all right with you if I went back tofocusing on this funny little stuff? It’s up to you but I would put either thisguy or this guy in charge, in my job. And frankly, I’d probably take the otherone and put him in charge of another position at the same level in anothergroup that needed some leadership.” And he said, “Let’s do it.” So I went back to this Electro-optics Organization it was called, that hadmaybe a maximum of eighty people in it in ’68-’69. But then I was back inthat, and I was enjoying it and with pretty much a hand-picked team and doinginteresting work. But I had a real problem beginning in ’68 because itoccurred to me that although I liked what I was doing, I didn’t want to keepworking for a big company. And if I wanted to work for a big company Iwould have kept working for them because they treated me really well; I’dbeen given a lot of opportunity and responsibility and [was] well compensatedand all that. But I didn’t want to work for another big company. But I wasalways so busy doing what I was doing that I didn’t have time to think aboutwhat I would do if I weren’t doing what I was doing. And I found that veryfrustrating.People interviewed me about coming to be the number two person at somelittle company in the Valley at that time, and I talked to people about that. Igot a little exposure to the venture capital business through that route, and Iwas talking to people and thinking. I thought about starting a company, butsome of what I was doing at GTE could have been spun out as a company butin this case they were interested in having it. It was not like earlier when itwas sort of an adjunct. And I’d been treated very well; it didn’t seem to meappropriate to take what I was doing for them and just do it separately. And soit was not clear what to do!At that time I met Jack Melchor who had started a couple of companiessuccessfully here. One—Melabs in 1956, one HP Associates as a joint venturewith Hewlett-Packard in 1961.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now before you get too far, say a little bit for the record about where he camefrom, what his background was, please. McMurtry: Jack is originally from North Carolina. He had gotten a bachelor’s and amaster’s in physics from the University of North Carolina, had then been inthe navy during World War II, and then after World War II went to NotreDame and got a PhD in physics at Notre Dame in the microwave field. Andin ’53 he came out to— His first job after the PhD was in Mountain Viewworking for Sylvania in their Electronic Defense Laboratories. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you ran into him there. McMurtry: I didn’t know him there because he left. Jack came to Sylvania in ’53 and heleft in ’56 to start Melabs. I didn’t come till ’57.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you missed him by a year. McMurtry: That’s right. I missed him by a year.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But had he left a history behind him. Was his name floating around? McMurtry: His name was floating around and I’d met him. He was running HPAssociates, which was a joint venture with Hewlett-Packard that he sold out toHP completely in ’65. And then Dave Packard asked him if he would run thenascent computer group at HP. And so he agreed to do that and was doing thatand had interesting people working for him. Bill [William H.] Davidow wasworking for him and later became Intel Marketing and then Mohr Davidow.Tom Perkins of Kleiner Perkins was working for him.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh really. McMurtry: A bunch of interesting characters. But Jack had some medical problems at HP.He actually hyperventilated. They thought he had a heart attack, which wasscary, but hyperventilation is even scarier if they give you oxygen, which theydid, which can really give you trouble. He, having had that experience in thesummer of ’68 said, “I don’t think I’m going to work this hard.” And so hewas looking around for something different to do. We’d been introducedin ’68 because some people who wanted to start a company, wanted both Jackand me to get involved, and the four of us had met. Then Jack and I talkedafterwards and our conclusion was those two guys should just go do it; theydon’t need either one of us. They could use some encouragement maybe, butthere’s not a role for either one of us. So we agreed with that and we sort ofkept in touch. And then in early ’69 Jack decided he wanted to set up a seedcapital venture capital operation.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now how did he come to that idea? McMurtry: Well, he had done some venture investing. He’d been doing it on his own,helping entrepreneurs out over the years. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. With his own money. McMurtry: With his own money and had made good money doing that. And he’d startedtwo of his own companies and he said, “That’s something that I’d like to do.”And so keep it small. So he decided to set up a seed capital venture capital[Palo Alto Investment Company] operation headquartered in Los Altos in alittle building he owned, upstairs in an apartment, actually, and asked me, inthe spring of ’69 if I would join him and another guy from HP who hadworked for him there; the three of us were going to form a team together.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now why did he think of you? McMurtry: He thought of me because he had been— He’d heard a lot of good thingsabout me from other people who he had some confidence in, and I think theinteractions that he and I had had in looking at this company where peoplewanted us to get involved, and a couple of other conversations that we hadhad just impressed him that I was a bright, young guy and somebody that hecould probably work with.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But why would he think that you— So far you had been— McMurtry: I had no entrepreneurial [experience].<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And certainly no venture capital experience, per se. McMurtry: No, no.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You’d been either managing or doing research. McMurtry: That’s right. I had very limited management experience.Jack is a very intuitive character, and has more than once shown the ability toback some people. The ROLM case was a great example. The ROLM guyshad decided to leave in ’68 and started looking for financing. Ken Oshman,who was working for somebody who worked for me at that time, had come totell me that they were doing this, because whatever they were going to do wastotally non-competitive with what GTE was doing. And we tried really hard tokeep them at GTE because they were such good people, but also we were notgoing to get in their way if they got it financed and could do it. So Jack 30Melchor decided to be a co-founder with them of ROLM and he providedinitial funding plus a big loan that was repaid later.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And this is still his own money? Or does he have a fund by now? McMurtry: Strictly his own money, strictly his own money. So he backed these guys todevelop a ruggedized minicomputer. These are the days of mini-computersand Digital Equipment and Data General and a bunch of other companies.These guys were going to ruggedize the Data General computer to have astandard minicomputer that can be sold into ruggedized environments that themilitary might buy, as opposed to having to reinvent one of these things all thetime and pay them much more for it and have it be less reliable and lessmaintainable.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What about the mini part of it though? Aren’t we talking about hugecomputers at this stage? McMurtry: No, these were tabletop computers. This was the field that had been pioneeredby Digital Equipment Corporation and then later by companies like DataGeneral and others that became the second big wave of computing before themicrocomputer hit, before the personal computer hit.Jack looked at Richeson, Oshman, Loewenstern, and Maxfield. Maxfield wasthe only guy who had any experience in the computer field at all. He had threePhDs from Stanford and a master’s from Stanford and practically no businessexperience. Yes, they’d worked here and there, at GTE and so on, and Jacksaid, “I’m going to back these guys.” But he didn’t just back them; he backedthem, and then they put together a three-person board with Ken Oshman, JackMelchor, and John [Arnot] Wilson of Wilson Sonsini [Goodrich and Rosati].And Jack spent a lot of time mentoring these guys, not mentoring in the senseof saying, “Here’s what I would do.” But rather “Call me about anything—let’s talk about anything. If I don’t like what I see about what’s going on I’lllet you know.” He just turned out to be a very valuable mentor.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Meaning more in how you manage a business rather than what you’re doingwith your research? McMurtry: Yes, oh yes, much more on the business, much more.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because research wasn’t his forte. McMurtry: That’s right. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I have a note that there were four Rice graduates who also had degrees fromStanford. McMurtry: All four were Rice undergraduates who went on to get at least a master’sdegree at Stanford. And three of them received PhDs at Stanford.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you know them as well? McMurtry: Three had worked for me at GTE.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh okay. McMurtry: And one was the one I tried to hire and went to IBM instead.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I read that Arthur Rock was given the opportunity to invest and rejected it.This I got from John [W.] Wilson’s book [The New Venturers: Inside theHigh-Stakes World of Venture Capital]. He paraphrases Arthur Rock to saysomething like, what are you people doing trying to produce so many differentproducts? McMurtry: Well, their initial business plan was, in fact, multiple products and was a realzoo. Jack helped them narrow that down. He said, “I think I’m going to backyou guys, but we’re only going to do one thing.” I think when Arthur saw it, itwas much less focused. But Arthur’s reaction was highly rational, in that thesepeople were very, very inexperienced indeed. They may be bright and able buthad essentially no experience at the kind of thing they were setting out to do.But they did set out to do it in a highly focused manner, which is one ofMelchor’s greatest traits, and then did it exceptionally well. They not only didthat, but they got the company profitable and growing in the ruggedminicomputer business. Then in ’73, they decided they were going to go into anew business, namely the telephone PBX [private branch exchange] business.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why? McMurtry: They were going to build the first fully electronic computer-controlledtelephone switch, not for central offices but for remote sites for businesses andso on. And so they set out to develop this thing. They were still a privatecompany. I remember thinking these guys are crazy! Because that is aminefield of failed companies and big companies dominating it. But the moreI looked at it and talked with them about what they were doing, I got intrigued by it and I spent a lot of time evaluating it in 1975. They were about ready tointroduce their product in the summer of ’75. I spent a lot of time looking at itand concluded this thing could really work. I decided to get our fund, whichwe had then set up in ’74 called Institutional Venture Associates—we decidedto invest in ROLM.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that largely at your behest? McMurtry: It was largely at my behest, but because I was already a shareholder inROLM, because of my personal investment and involvement with Palo AltoInvestment Company, I was in a totally conflicted position, absolutelyconflicted. So I went to my partners—Reid Dennis, Burge Jamieson, andJames P. [Jim] Norris—and said, “I really think this is something very, veryinteresting that we ought to think about doing. But because I’m an investor Ican’t be a part of the decision. So I’ve done a lot of work on it; here’s thework that I’ve done. I’m willing to work on it if we decide to do it, but if wedecide to do it it’s got to be something you all decide because we can’toperate any other way.” And they looked at it hard, and after looking at it harddecided that we wanted to invest, and we did and I went on the board of thecompany.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All right, but we need to backtrack [chuckling], because what happens next isthe Palo Alto Investment Company. McMurtry: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now was that founded around ROLM? McMurtry: No, no, no, no, no.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I should just ask you an open-ended question. How did that come to be? McMurtry: That came about because Jack founded it in about June of ’69, whichhappened to be the same month that ROLM was founded. But Palo AltoInvestment Company had nothing to do with ROLM initially. Jack had apersonal investment in ROLM and was a director. But then he set up this littleseed capital venture capital company called Palo Alto Investment Company.Don Smith and I were the two employees of that company, working with Jack.And also Lowell [W.] Morse who was in the same office, because Lowell wasJack’s personal business manager, and so it was all of us worked on this. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now this is very early on. Were you calling what you were doing venturecapital? McMurtry: Yes, yes. We called it venture capital, but you can look around. There were afew people who were in the business and calling it that. The Draper, Gaither& Anderson people had been around, and Sutter Hill<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: As I remember, Draper, Gaither & Anderson was founded in 1969. McMurtry: Fifty-nine.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You’re right. I’m a decade behind. McMurtry: And then Sutter Hill, I think started in ’64.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, so it was not quite as early as I was thinking. McMurtry: Arthur Rock and Tommy [Thomas J.] Davis had done— Well, actually,Tommy started Mayfield in ’69 after we had started. But Tommy had beenwith Kern County Land Company doing venture capital. No, wait, back up.He had been with Kern County Land [Company] where he backed things likeWatkins-Johnson in the late fifties. Then he and Arthur Rock put together theDavis & Rock partnership in 1961, that ran from ’61 to ’69 and had thesegreat investments.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That was my mistake. I was a decade off. McMurtry: So we started Palo Alto Investment Company which was some of Jack’smoney, and any money that we could invest. We had saved some money, andwe took all the money we had saved and put it into this. We also could borrowsome money that Jack guaranteed, which was wonderful. So we put that in aswell. And we also had several million dollars that Jack had arranged throughhis friend William J. [Bill] Swanson, who was a local broker. One ofSwanson’s client’s friends was a Saudi guy who later gained a lot of notoriety.His name was Adnan Khashoggi. Adnan was interested in investing in someof these things and got some other people from the Saudi family to invest. Sothere was a total of about $3 million that could be invested.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that a big sum in those days?  McMurtry: No, but $3 million was a useful sum because a typical investment would be$50,000-$100,000, and then you could follow it all up; you could make a lotof investments. But many of the people who were doing venture at the timewere doing it as individuals. Pitch Johnson had started Draper Johnson firstand then decided to do his own thing. Draper did Sutter Hill, and Pitch didwhat became Asset Management. Reid Dennis was working for AmericanExpress and Fireman’s Fund but had started doing ventures on the side,initially, and then got them into it as corporations. Bill Bowes was doing it.Reid Dennis, Bill Edwards, John Bryan, Bill Bowes had all known each otherfor years and had a little investment club.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is that The Group? McMurtry: I don’t know what that was—I don’t know that they had a name for it. We’llhave to ask. Bill Edwards would [know].<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I think Reid Dennis said that too. McMurtry: It was a very casual group that got together and made private investments, soa lot of it was being done that way.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, maybe talk about Khashoggi. Had the Saudi family been investing allalong? McMurtry: No, I think this was a relatively new thing and more [that] Khashoggi knewsome people here, and Swanson knew one of the guys who knew Khashoggi.This was not a big deal for them but just something that they wanted to do,and so they put some money into it, although it took forever for anything goodto happen. There’d been a big boom in the public markets. In ’66 to ’68 it hadcrashed and ’69 was a tough time. And ’69 on was a punishing time to be inthe venture business because there was hardly any money around for ventures,and it was also just a slow time for business. There were almost no publicofferings. The first public offering I was associated with was in 1976, and thatwas ROLM. And then they sold below their offering price for the first fifteenmonths they were public.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You’ve got the oil crisis in there too, 1973. McMurtry: Yes, the ’73 thing—that was incredible. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Does that have any resonance with what’s going on now? McMurtry: It may. I know that having gone in the venture business, invested all themoney we had to invest, borrowed money that I couldn’t then justify havingborrowed, and then not seeing a single dollar back from a successfulinvestment for six years and two months was a painful thing. It was morepatience than I had, but it was actually a very constructive thing to have livedthrough. I think the main reason is that you learn a lot about the business ifyou’re in that much trouble. We did sixteen total startups in four years andlost money on half of them and lost all of our money on half of them. And we only had a few winners. I.I. Industries was the first one that returnedanything. It was a nice return in August of ’75, and then ROLM went publicin ’76 but didn’t generate a lot of value until ’78. And then it was huge value!If you’d bought at the public offering of ROLM in ’76, by the time theywere—a few years later than that, or when they sold to IBM in ’84, you gotforty times your money. Which was a huge return.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now all that period of nothing much happening—do you count that up to theeconomic climate? Or was it more than that? Could it also be somewhat tiedinto what you don’t yet know about investment? McMurtry: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And analyzing the potential of a business and all those things that go into it? McMurtry: Some of it is. But I think particularly in those days, the venture business was athing sort of unto itself, in that we were starting funny little companies, andvery few of these companies really got very big. And so there were a lot ofbusiness fundamentals that you had to be very concerned about. The mostimportant one was if you’ve got a product, or you need to develop a product,what customer need is there that is going to be satisfied by this product? Andis it going to be satisfied at a price point that permits you to build yourbusiness, and who’s going to let you satisfy that need? Aren’t therecompetitors who are going to be in the position to satisfy that need muchbetter than you can?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now was that concept obvious to you from the start? McMurtry: Oh yes, absolutely. One of the reasons that I’ve always liked the venturebusiness, the startup venture business, is it’s really not complicated financiallyat all. And it’s much more commonsensical. What are we trying to do? And does anybody care? And does somebody care enough that they might paymoney for it?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] That’s what it all boils down to? McMurtry: And one thing leads to another. The amount of financial analysis, detailedfinancial analysis I ever was required to do about any startup venture we did,could be done on the back of an envelope! I mean this is not verysophisticated stuff.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But does that still hold today? McMurtry: I think to first order it holds, in the centrality of customer demand. But thescale is very different. One of the many changes in the venture business and inthe electronics industry broadly defined, in the years that I’ve been in it, is itused to be a funny little business and you could build little businesses. If yougot a business that got to $50 million in revenue, that was a very successfulelectronics company! And if you got to $100 million, that was really strange,and if you got to a billion, that was weird! That was just— You weresomething else. Things have changed dramatically. Now there’s much more money in theventure business, and the business opportunities— The way the electronicsand the way the chip revolution has occurred, the revolution in chips andmemory storage and all this—you’ve got businesses now that are huge! And itgets more complicated, for sure, compared to our funny little venture days.It’s less likely that a single entrepreneur is going to walk in your door and say,“I’m going to go attack the PC industry. You know, it’s not going to happen. You have to adjust to the times that you’re in, and certainly the fact that theventure business has become large is not so much because everybody thoughtventures should be bigger. But business opportunities have become very large,and the returns to investors from some of these very big opportunities havebecome such that the capital follows in. A point that I would make strongly is that as much as I value venture capital[and] venture capitalists, and I’m proud of my role as a venture capitalist, Iwould argue that almost always, the press and a lot of venture capitalistsoverrate the role of the venture capitalist very dramatically and underrate therole of the entrepreneur. It’s as if venture guys invent companies and ideas. Ithappens occasionally, but for every ten times you hear about it happening, it’sa bit of a reinvention if not a major reinvention. Now there are some people inthe venture business, a number of people in the venture business, who Ipractically revere because their ability to size up interesting opportunities that are not at all obvious and then pursue them aggressively and then help turnthose companies into major enterprises—that’s a huge, that’s a great talent.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And you don’t think you’ve done that? McMurtry: I don’t have the talent at that level. I have had the privilege of being alongwith some very effective entrepreneurs, so that I’ve certainly had the personalsatisfaction and the financial rewards of having been very successful. But Ihave to say, without any fabrication, that when I’ve been involved with verysuccessful ventures, I wonder if it wouldn’t have done just as well if I hadn’tbeen there. Whereas when you’re involved with one that doesn’t work, youcan see your fingerprints all over it, all over it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What I get loud and strong from talking to your generation is that venturecapital—and please correct me—is not just a matter of investing money andhoping for good returns. It’s very closely tied with building a company. McMurtry: Absolutely.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So how can you say you don’t have a part in it? McMurtry: Oh no, I do. I do. I just don’t put myself in the category of some people in thebusiness who I think have just been unusually and are unusually capable ofidentifying opportunities and taking advantage of them.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is that some very astute ability to assess the potential of the technology? McMurtry: I think it’s a weird set of talents having to do with being able to focus onmoving targets—understanding what the market opportunity might be,understanding what technologies might be brought to bear to influence it, andwhat competitive environment might you be in, understanding who are thepeople who actually might pull this kind of thing off—it’s amazing. My partner in TVI, Dave [David F.] Marquardt, who’s currently a partner ofAugust Capital, one of the partnerships that came out of TVI [TechnologyVenture Investors], I think is one of a number of people who have this unusualability to size things up. He got us involved in 1980 with Microsoft, whenMicrosoft was a profitable company. They were five years old and they were aBASIC-language company, but they were profitable and growing but wantedsome external help. They didn’t need to be told how to run the business butthey wanted some external help. Dave spent a lot of time with them, and we were ultimately permitted to invest in the company and became the onlyoutside investors in Microsoft in 1981.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That was all right, wasn’t it! McMurtry: That’s right. But you know, Dave, in meeting then with Bill Gates and Paul[G.] Allen who was his partner then, and Steve Ballmer—just concluded theseguys really had an unusual opportunity. Now did they know that it couldbecome what it became? No, heavens no! But he knew that the ideas wereimportant, the market opportunity was good, and these were people we reallywanted to back. A year later he got us involved with Sun Microsystems whenSun was only six months old. And as a measure of how the world changes, forthe first, I think, eight or nine years Dave was on the Sun board and theMicrosoft board, and they were in totally different universes. Only later didthat converge.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, let’s talk about you. I think I can see some tie-ins with your pastexperience—the oil field work maybe is teaching you about what goes on inthe real world and maybe how you deal with people and all that. McMurtry: Right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And then, of course, your engineering, not only education but yourexperience, is giving you a vocabulary and a technical basis to which you canapply various things. Where do your strengths lie? Do you lean one way or theother in these two realms when you’re looking at a new possibility? McMurtry: I am pretty clearly more influenced by the entrepreneurs themselves, and getmore satisfaction from interaction with the entrepreneurs than from anythingelse. As I look back on my career, it is pretty clear that as interesting as someof the technology was, I was always more interested in the people than in themarket, and more interested in the market than in the technology.Part of it is your education sort of takes charge of itself after a while. If youstart down a particular path and stay with it, and that sort of happened to meand I had a great time. But it was also very clear I wanted to be doingsomething different. I didn’t want to be an individual contributor engineer orresearcher long term. Gavitating toward the venture business, particularly,turned out to be really rewarding to me personally because I’ve always likedstarting things. I don’t like running things when they’re running well. I foundthat out later. And in ventures almost nothing’s running well. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because running things is boring? McMurtry: Yes. I get bored but it’s not boring! In fact, you want people running everybusiness, any business that’s trying to grow, you want people running thebusiness who consider it not the least bit boring, but who consider thatincremental improvement in absolutely every aspect of what they’re doing ishugely satisfying and hugely challenging, and that’s what they want to beworking on.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But not for you. McMurtry: But not for me, because I’m just more interested in where else can I go get introuble! [<|endoftext|>
Interviewer laughs] And the venture business provided me with ampleopportunities. I go back to say I was more influenced by the people than bythe market opportunity. In comparing myself to other people who have beenvery, very good at the venture business—some of them are very clearly morefocused on the business opportunity itself, the market opportunity, than on thepeople. They avoid some mistakes that I made in the past and would makeagain probably were I to become enamored of the people and unwilling to beas realistic as I need to be about what the market opportunity is.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Some of the advice that you and Jack Melchor received, according again toJohn Wilson, was that it would be wise to invest at the mezzanine level, andyou said no way. McMurtry: Right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you want to talk about that? McMurtry: We felt that the rewards were going to be a lot better investing in raw startups.It turns out that’s not always true, and we had the benefit in the early days ofInstitutional Venture Associates of being able to make some—they weren’tmezzanine but they were not startup investments—that were very, verysuccessful because the whole climate was one in which venture investing wasnot highly valued. There was not much capital available, and therefore, theownership position that we were able to get in a fair market transaction led tosome very substantial gains, but that’s another tangent.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Investing at the mezzanine level means dealing with a company that has somehistory. 40 McMurtry: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And that wasn’t as exciting as starting at the very earliest stage? McMurtry: That’s true, although if you look at some of the better successes we had—oneof them was Microsoft, which was a five-year old profitable company, sixyear old, when we actually made the investment. And if you look at ROLM—ROLM when IVA invested was a six-year-old profitable company. Otherinvestments—Triad Systems, which Jack and I did, was also profitable whenIVA invested in it. KLA Tencor was also not profitable, but they were not astartup. So we had a bunch that were not startups.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. So it’s not a hard and fast rule. McMurtry: It’s not a hard and fast rule.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is the bottom line are you going to make money in this deal? McMurtry: Yes. You have to be focused on not just making money but potentially makinga lot of money if the thing really works, because you can’t afford to risk yourpartners’ money and your own money. You would never say, “Well, I’mgoing to learn something about this business and its industry, so I’ll make alittle investment there.” You would never do that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What about when it’s your own money? McMurtry: Oh then you can do dumber things. [<|endoftext|>
Interviewer chuckles] You really have muchmore flexibility with your own money.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I would think so. McMurtry: And I’ve done some investments over the years, since I’ve been out of ventureinvesting for other people. I’ve made some seed investments that I wouldnever have made with anyone else’s money.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So that responsibility for managing other people’s money is a big deal?  McMurtry: It’s a very big deal.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do we need to stop? McMurtry: In fact, I need to break because I’m running into some time pressure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, it’s June 30, 2009, and this is the second interview with Dr. McMurtry.And as I said off-tape, I think we’re up to Institutional Venture Associates,which was founded in 1973. One of the many things you said last time wasthat was not an optimal period for venture capital. [laughter] So what wereyou thinking when you started off on this new partnership? McMurtry: What I was thinking was that I really wanted to remain in the venture capitalbusiness, and it was time to refinance and to restaff Palo Alto InvestmentCompany because Jack Melchor, who had been the founder of it and hadgotten me involved, had decided he wanted to be less involved in the day-today operations of the enterprise. So I was looking around to try to figure outhow to get additional financing, which was very difficult, and to addadditional people to it. At that time, Reid Dennis was planning, just in the early stages of planning toleave American Express where he had been for some time, and there was ayoung man named Jim Norris who worked with him there who I knew quitewell. And the three of us got together and then were joined by J. BurgessJamieson to start Institutional Venture Associates in August of 1973. We spent six months full-time trying to raise money for IVA. We had a leadinvestor, in that American Express had said that if we could find $10 millionto match their $5 million that they would put up $5 million for a $15 millionto $20 million fund. And so we set out to see if we could find the incrementalfunding. And that turned out to be very difficult, quite a long story in itself,million from seven institutional partners. We were very, very grateful for theirsupport because most other people we talked to at that time told us that theythought we were basically crazy to think about doing something like that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Meaning because of the economic climate?  McMurtry: The economic conditions, the market conditions, and even if you backed acompany that became successful—although that was unlikely—even if youbacked a successful company and if it went public it would sell in themarketplace at some very modest price, and so the return to the investors wasnot there. Of course our argument was that getting things started in adownturn is the most positive time to do it, provided you believe that it’s adownturn and not a permanent decline! [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: In other words, the only way you can go is up, you hope! McMurtry: That’s right. That’s right. And we were fortunate in being able to find somepeople who were willing to back us.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now were you pulling on some of the connections that you had established? McMurtry: I really had no financial connections with any of the firms that we ended upgetting money from, which were mainly insurance companies and AmericanExpress and the Ford Foundation. It was an unusual mix. But we did get it puttogether, and I continued to work with Jack Melchor on the Palo AltoInvestment Company investments. And so I was sort of doing double dutythere for some period of time.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, well particularly since from what you’ve said, that Jack Melchor waskind of pulling back. McMurtry: Yes, he wanted to be less directly involved, although he was involved onsome of the boards. It all worked out fine. We got the money raised. It wasvery interesting. We raised this money for IVA in April and May of ’74, andthen we began looking for investment opportunities, and it took us fifteenmonths until we found the first opportunity to invest in.In hindsight, fortunately, we did not miss any great deals during that time thatwe were exposed to. But it was clear to us years later that we had been sotraumatized by the process of raising money and had been told by so manypeople that it was a crazy thing to do and that you couldn’t make money inthis business, and that even if you backed a successful company it wouldn’tsell for much in the market. We were traumatized by that. We didn’t know itat the time, but it’s pretty clear that we were influenced by that. We broke thatlogjam in the fall of ’75, and it was interesting, the first investment we madewas in ROLM, and I think I mentioned something about that last time.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, you did.  McMurtry: In which I could do a lot of the work, but I had to withdraw from any decisionby the partnership on whether we would do it. We did do it and that turned outto be a very big success. We also did a company called NBI, which was aword-processing company. The initials NBI stood for Nothing But Initials,which was a clever name. [laughter] And they were in Boulder, Colorado andthey had a slow start but ended up becoming quite a successful company for atime. And then another investment we made, somewhat later, was in Triad SystemsCorporation, which had been started in ’72. In 1979, I think, we made aninvestment in that company, actually a secondary investment, bought stockfrom people who were interested in selling. We also did an investment, not until ’78, although I started working with themin ’75, in a company called KLA which made very sophisticated inspectionsystems for the semiconductor industry. And although we started workingwith them in ’75, I had just committed to several investments and knew that Iwas buried and so referred them to other people who could finance the firstphase, and I wanted to get involved with the next phase. Unfortunately, thenext phase, the people who did the first phase wanted to do it all, and veryfortunately there was a third phase in 1978, which our firm, IVA, waspermitted to do and so we got very involved with KLA.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All of a sudden you’re finding all kinds of investment opportunities. Was theeconomic climate changing and entrepreneurs were coming out of thewoodwork? McMurtry: The economic climate was clearly changing and entrepreneurs were comingout of the woodwork. And people had survived the ’73-’74 downturn. If Irecall correctly, in the fall of 1974 the Dow was at 600 or something like that.So it’s not hard to imagine that people were a bit low at that stage. IVA turned out to be a very successful partnership. We only had one, I think,really big miss in that partnership, and that was we had an opportunity quiteearly to invest in Tandem Computers. And we declined to do that which wasextraordinarily unfortunate because it turned out to be—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, and then Kleiner Perkins turned— McMurtry: And it was the KP guys who gave us the opportunity to do it. They had startedtheir fund in 1972, and so they were around when IVA got started.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Another set of engineers.  McMurtry: Yes, a bunch of engineers. That’s right. But we had a wonderful time in IVAand [with?] the fund that raised $19 million. By the time it was six and sevenyears old, it had distributed to its limited partners cash and liquid securitiesworth over $200 million, which was really quite remarkable and somethingthat I did not realize could happen, because my earliest experience had beenthe Palo Alto Investment Company experience. In that case, as I mentionedlast time, I think, it took six years and two months until we saw the first dollarback from any investment we ever made, and it took nine, almost ten years forthe Palo Alto Investment Company portfolio to become really highly valuable.In the tenth year, the combination of cash and liquid securities valued thatportfolio at about a little over $100 million, and we had begun with a total of$3.3 million. But my goodness, it took forever; it was very, very slow.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You mentioned the Ford Foundation as an original investor. McMurtry: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was it commonplace for nonprofits to make risk investments? McMurtry: No, it was relatively uncommon at the time. Stanford had begun to do it andthe Ford Foundation—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: At your behest? Did you have any connection with getting them involved? McMurtry: With Stanford?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: At Stanford. McMurtry: At Stanford—I’ll come to that in a moment, because they did get involved.The Ford Foundation was unusual in that they had an investment manager forspecial investments at that time who was interested in venture and ended upmaking an investment in IVA. They also made an investment in Mayfield andso on, although they had a lot of transitions in that team over time. But otherinstitutions, universities, and so on, did begin to get involved.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What was happening at the federal level? Tax laws and— McMurtry: Yes, there were some big changes in the late seventies—really two very largechanges. One of them was in 1978 the capital gains tax was reduced from 50 percent down to 28 percent, which was a gigantic move—the SteigerAmendment. It produced quite a change. The next thing that happened was in1979 the Department of Labor modified its requirements for management ofpension funds to permit pension funds to invest in illiquid vehicles likeventure capital—illiquid meaning you put your money in and you can’t call itback out or you can’t sell it very readily. And that made a huge difference tothe amount of money flowing into venture capital, whereas it was quitemodest in the mid-seventies, I think when we raised the $19 million in 1974.I think it was more than a fifth of all the money raised by venture capital inthe U.S. in that year. But by ’78, with the capital gains tax reduction in ’79,the amount of money flowing into venture capital went from roughly $100million a year or less up to $200 million, $400 million, $600 million—it wasclimbing very, very rapidly.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now did Steiger and colleagues—I’m sure there were others involved—seethis as a way of getting the U.S. economy going? And did they look at venturecapital—can you now call it an industry by the late seventies? McMurtry: No, no, no. Venture capital was still a very funny little enterprise. Even peoplein Washington who had learned enough about it to know that there was astimulus effect in creating new enterprises did not believe, most of them didnot believe, that that the stimulus effect would lead to major economicchange. They felt that it was healthy and constructive and stimulatinginnovation, but not necessarily that there would be a gigantic boom that wouldcome out of it, as in fact happened.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do I gather from this, then, that things like the reduction in the capital gainstax were not particularly aimed at helping venture capital? McMurtry: They were not particularly aimed at helping venture capital. The capital gainstax reduction goes back a long way. But one person, a guy named Bill[William F.] Ballhaus, Sr., who was at Beckman Instruments, did a personalcrusade to try to convince Congress that if you want to stimulate investmentand create growth, you’ve got to remove some of the impediments, some ofthe taxes on capital, and you’ve got to make the capital more mobile, andyou’ve got to make it more available. He took that up and others took it up.The National Venture Capital Association, which was started in about ’73—‘73, yes, that’s right—took up that charge and began working on it. ReidDennis, my partner at TVI, along with David Morgenthaler, worked endlesslyto try to get the changes in the tax law, and it actually had some impact onthat. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, Mr. Dennis talked about that in his interview. It was very interesting. McMurtry: It was very, very well done. I told Reid at the time I thought the effort that hewas spending in that arena was a waste of time. [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You ate your words! McMurtry: And I ate my words, and I ate them very, very happily indeed. I was startledand pleased at that result. But let me jump ahead for a moment, if I may, andwe can come back.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Sure. McMurtry: In late ’79, early 1980, I was thinking about what the next phase of my careermight be. I was very happy working with Reid and Burge—Jim Norris hadleft the partnership at that point. But I decided that for the next phase of myventure career, I really wanted to see if I could put together a group withpeople younger than I, smarter than I, and who could set a new tone for whatwe were trying to do. And I would continue to work with Institutional VentureAssociates and continue to wrap up all of the investments that we had madeand continue in making new investments, for that matter. Although by thetime you get to the sixth year of a ten-year fund, you’ve pretty much done allthe new investing, that is investing in new companies, that you’re going to do. So I decided to start something, and we ended up calling it TechnologyVenture Investors. I started planning it in the spring of 1980 and got Jim[James J.] Bochnowski and Dave [David F.] Marquardt to join me.Bochnowski had been running Shugart Associates, a local disk drivecompany, and had previously been in the venture business with the Sprout[Group] fund, which was part of Donaldson, Lufkin, and Jenrette. DaveMarquardt was an engineer from Columbia who had worked locally in thedisk drive industry and then had gone to the Stanford Business School andwas finishing the Stanford Graduate School of Business in 1979. The three ofus got together to start Technology Venture Investors, and all seven of theIVA institutional partners were interested in investing. Then we were contacted by two other people who were very interested inwhat we were up to and who at that stage had become interested in alternativeinvestments and had been tracking who was doing what in that business. Oneof them was at Stanford University—Rod [Rodney H.] Adams, the treasurerof Stanford, who was a pioneer in that field. Rod contacted us, and we wentthrough all the hoops with him of being evaluated and talking with him. But they decided to invest, as well as did the pension and profit-sharing plans ofthe Hewlett-Packard Company. They had decided that they were interested inthis alternative investment arena also, and so they got involved. We ended upwith nine partners in the first TVI fund, which was a $24 million fund, as Irecall. We charged ahead and started making investments in what was thengetting to be a pretty frothy time.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: The early eighties. McMurtry: We invested very rapidly, and in fact raised a second TVI fund in 1982. Weraised one in ’80, one in ’82, and then we raised the third fund in 1984, andthat fund lasted until 1988 when we raised the last TVI fund.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: This was a very different economic time than when you formed the firstpartnership. How much did your reputation—particularly your success rate—play into your ability to get investors? McMurtry: Oh it plays in dramatically. The ultimate success of the Palo Alto InvestmentCompany portfolio and the success of the IVA portfolio gave us theimprimatur of success that we had lacked earlier. Since all of us like to backwinners, we tend to gravitate in that direction. And it leads to a situation inwhich it is easy to get money, as long as you are successful. Your challenge isnot to take so much money that you cannot manage it effectively, and so thatyou can remain successful over time.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And did you consciously stop trying to gather new investments? Realizing at acertain point you had enough and you couldn’t handle much more? McMurtry: No, we were concerned in TVI that we already had raised perhaps too muchmoney and had made too many investments, and in fact to some extent thatbecame true in the ’83 peak. In the downturn after that we had a lot oflosers—actually no more than usual—but they’re always punishing when theyhappen. But we never felt that we should go try to raise as much money as wecould raise, thank God. We focused on how much money could we raise andput to work effectively, given the team that we had and the team that weplanned to have. And that led what we did. All four TVI funds—the totalinvestment we had—was $270 million, which to me is still a very largenumber, but it is a small fund by today’s standards.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So does your restraint not apply today?  McMurtry: The world changed, the world changed. And more opportunities becameavailable to put larger amounts of money at work, more opportunities werethere to build companies that could grow to billion-dollar marketcapitalization. ROLM got there and ultimately KLA got there, but almostnone of the earlier companies could achieve that level because the marketsthey were addressing were typically relatively small. It was only with the realboom of the chip business and the minicomputer and then themicrocomputer—the PC business and disk drives and so on—did markets getbig enough that you could have these very large companies. I do think thatover the years, certain funds have succumbed to the very real pressure to takemore money, please take more money and do it. And it’s caused people tochange their strategy a bit if they find that they’re managing much moremoney than they were used to managing.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How might they change their strategy in that case? McMurtry: People have tended to need to put more money at work in a particularcompany. And that can lead you to over-invest dollars in a company thatperhaps should be kept on a somewhat shorter leash. It tends to also cause youto think about investing in later-stage investments where you can often putmore money to work, and it just tends to take you off focus. We managed tostay pretty much on focus, in spite of, I’m sorry to say, never really gettingbetter at reducing the number of losses we had. It was very frustrating. But asmuch as we were unable to reduce the number of losses that we had, wecontinued to have the good fortune of finding very successful companies toback. And we got other people involved. Bob Kagle joined us in 1984 at TVI,having been at Boston Consulting Group. Then Jim Bochnowski left the firmin 1988 because he’d been doing some biotech investing. We were doingbiotech and information technology within TVI when we decided they wereso different that they should be separate. So we spun off the biotech investingas a separate fund called Delphi Ventures, which is still doing very well, andkept TVI focused on information technology. That was Dave Marquardt and Iand Bob Kagle, and then John Johnston joined us 1988, and that hascontinued. We got TVI pretty well wrapped up, fortunately. In 1994 when I was deciding what I wanted to do next, I decided I wanted tocontinue to work out all the TVI investments but I did not want to be a generalpartner of a new fund going forward. My partners decided at that time thatalthough they could continue together and do another TVI thing, they decidedto do two new funds. Dave and John decided to do August Capital, and BobKagle got together with Bruce [W.] Dunlevie and three other guys to startBenchmark Capital. They did those in ’95, and I invested in both of those buthad no management responsibility for them, which was delightful. Then I continued to work on TVI companies. It took another eight years until I wasoff the last board from a TVI company, but we had a wonderful time in TVI.Dave Marquardt got us involved as the only outside investors in Microsoft in1981, and he started working on that in 1980.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: When you say outside, what do you mean? McMurtry: Meaning that it’s the only money other than family and friends that came intoit. Microsoft was not a startup; they started in 1975. They were profitablewhen we invested in 1981, but they permitted us to invest because they wereinterested in getting some help, and they felt that Dave and our firm could beuseful to them, and we were very privileged to be able to get involved. Wehad no idea how successful it could be, we just had no idea how successfulthey might be.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, and you cited Microsoft and ROLM as well in the first interview asbeing exceptions to your rule that seed capital, startup funds, are what youprefer to do. McMurtry: That’s right. That’s right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But these firms were just too good? McMurtry: These were so good, these were so good. Another example of that was donelate in 1990. Intuit, the company that makes the Quicken financial packageand now Turbotax, and so on—Quickbooks—had never raised any significantoutside capital. They were started in 1984, but in 1990 they were alreadyprofitable and growing like Microsoft had been. They were interested ingetting some help, and they ran what in the venture business we call a charmcontest, in which they talked to a lot of different investment bankers andventure capitalists to see with whom they would like to work and permit toinvest in their company, We were given the opportunity, along with KleinerPerkins and Sierra Ventures, to invest in Intuit. I went on the board in 1990,and John Doerr, a friend from Kleiner Perkins, went on the board, and weserved on the board together. Actually, I left the board in 2001, which is aboutas long as I’ve been on any board. But I had a wonderful time, and they werea terrific group of people going through a lot of transitions. Other things that we did in TVI, where Dave also got us involved with SunMicrosystems when Sun was six months old, in August of ’82. As a measureof how the world changes, for the first seven years he was a director of Sunand a director of Microsoft when they were in different universes at that time.But he got off the Sun board later and stayed on the Microsoft board. 50<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And nobody looked askance? McMurtry: No, no. In fact, Sun was a UNIX-based engineering workstation company andMicrosoft was a DOS-based PC company. Their potential customers didn’treally overlap at all until later. We had a lot of other fun companies in TVI.We got involved with Linear Technology, a very good chip company, withAltera [Corporation], with Cirrus Logic, with Sierra Semiconductor. We also got involved with a company called VeriFone, which made all thetransaction automation systems that you see at retail counters—you run yourcard through and all that. VeriFone pioneered that area. It was an unusualcompany started in Hawaii and then moved to San Mateo. We backed it andparticipated in bringing in a new CEO with the support and encouragement ofthe existing CEO. Hatim Tyabji, who ran the company, did a fantastic job. Iwas on that board for a long time. We also did things like Synopsys, whichwas a design automation company, and did some disk drive companies, andI’d have to look at a list to see some of the others.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You’re talking about successes. How about bringing up one failure, and why? McMurtry: Oh we had many failures; we had many failures. And one of the failures that Ithink I feel the most—you feel bad about them all. But one I feel really badabout is one I spent about ten years working with and we still lost it. And wehad in the company some people who were exceptionally able and who laterwent on to do marvelous things, in particular in connection with Cisco[Systems]. The company was called DAVID Systems, which was acombination of voice and data communications over telephone lines, and itwas started in 1984, I believe, or maybe a little earlier. I went on the boardin ’84, and then we kept trying to figure out the path. It was going to betelephone communications, but with data available through it. Thetechnologists in the company had developed some very, very effectivetechniques for being able to do reasonably high-speed data transmission overtelephone wires. And yet we never found any kind of a sweet spot in themarket for that, in spite of raising a lot of money and working very, very hardon it, and working with some good management to try to make it happen.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer Why? McMurtry: None of us were smart enough to pay enough attention to the marketplace thatwas telling us that what we were trying to do did not make a lot of sense, atleast was not going to be big. And we didn’t pay enough attention to thetechnologists in the company to see the quality of what they were doing and ask ourselves, “Where might that find some significant application?” In otherwords, do a little marketing.Don’t take a product and say we’re going to shoveit into a market and invent a market. But rather, there’s some very clevertechnology here that they can do that other people can’t do very well, if at all.Where might that have application? And we were just, frankly, I the most,never smart enough to figure that out.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] Well, I don’t know about that. McMurtry: And we ended up literally losing the company after gigantic amounts ofinvestment and enormous effort on the part of a lot of people.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: There was a market somewhere, you just hadn’t found it? McMurtry: Yes, and then the market certainly evolved. But we just missed that onecompletely. But there were lots of others.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I want to hear about the personal dynamics in these partnerships. Would it befruitful to compare the two partnerships and how the partners in each workedtogether? I know it’s not a controlled study, because of course the economy isvery different in those two cases. Nonetheless, how do personality andpersonal relations amongst the partners fit into all this? McMurtry: That is, of course, a very complicated subject, but let me take a crack at it.There are certainly some similarities in the way the partnerships worked.Going back to Jack Melchor and our work together: even though Jack wasclearly a mentor and much more experienced than I, both as an entrepreneurand as an investor, he treated me on pretty much an equal basis. This is, whatwe were trying to do was each use our abilities to their maximum, to try tobenefit each other and the business that we were leading. And the same thinghappened in IVA. Jim Norris and Burge Jamieson and Reid Dennis and Iformed a very tight partnership, and we had rather dramatic personalitydifferences within that firm, as anyone would tell you.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, say a little bit about that. McMurtry: Reid is very outgoing. One of the most optimistic people you’ll ever meet andhas almost never seen a deal he didn’t like. [laughter] Now that is not to sayhe will do every deal that comes up. It’s just by nature he’s very, verypositive. Burge Jamieson, on the other hand, by nature is very reticent. In fact,in the IVA days, it could pretty much be said that it wasn’t clear that there wasa deal that Burge would like. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] So you’ve got two people poles apart! McMurtry: That’s right. But as someone who thought of himself as reasonably balanced,when in fact I know I’m a raging optimist, it was helpful to me in many ways,because I knew where Reid was coming from, I knew where Burge wascoming from. Very often, Reid would have some insights as to why the peoplewere interesting, and Burge would have some very good insights about whywe didn’t really understand this very well or why there might be some hazardsthere that we should pursue. So it was quite a helpful balance.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, and then you did pursue? McMurtry: After we broke the logjam of our terror, [laughter] the first fifteen months, wemade a number of investments that, as I said, became very successful. In the TVI partnership, there was much less variation. Jim Bochnowski andDave Marquardt and I were, I would say, by nature more similar than not, inthat no one in that group was either forward-biased to an extreme or reticent toan extreme. And so that, in a way, made a bunch of the conversations moreinteresting because you didn’t find yourself having to pull someone backwhile you’re dragging someone else ahead. But it also meant that, as in anypersonal interactions, diversity is often a benefit even though it’s a hugeannoyance. [<|endoftext|>
Interviewer chuckles] What we found after TVI was a couple of years old and we’d made someinvestments, we decided that we were not raging optimists but we wereobviously willing—we’d seen some mistakes already, as usual—and wedecided that we were perhaps not being as critical as we needed to be. And sowe set up a rule within the firm, and that was, if we get to the point of makingan investment decision, then if the three of us are really enthusiastic aboutmaking the investment, it was the job of one of us, not the same one all thetime, it was the job of one of us to say, “Wait a minute. We obviously don’tunderstand this deal well enough. We’ve got to do some more work on thisbefore we make a decision, because I think we’re being naïve and being sweptup in the enthusiasm.” And that turned out to be a very constructive thing todo in that it either caused us not to do deals or it caused us to do deals wherewe were much better informed than we would have been, and much lesssubject to surprise than we would have been if we had not done that particularwork.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. And was this due diligence, if you want to call it that, mainly consistingof picking up the telephone and getting others’ opinions? How did youinvestigate further?  McMurtry: The due diligence was done in several pieces. You generally tried tounderstand what the market opportunity was, and you used all the tools thatwere available to you. Generally if you found an investment in a market, andyou were the responsible person to pursue it, you knew something about thatmarket already, and you learned more as time went on. And you had contacts,people who were in businesses in that field, people who were consulting inthat field, and you’d done a fair amount of reading in it, so you could makesome guesstimates about what might go on there. You also looked in detail at the product plans and tried to figure out, really,just how different and interesting is this product? What kind of advantagesmight it have, how could and should it be priced in the marketplace, what kindof pricing flexibility is there, and what kind of growth potential is there? Andthen you’d spend a lot of time with the people. We’d spend a lot of timegetting personal references and then going back and talking to those personalreferences and trying to also talk, not just to the references that were given tous, but references that we were able to glean from talking to the references wetalked to. Because we would often say, “Well, who else might really knowthis person well and have a significant opinion?” And we generally, at least Ideveloped a system in which unless I had gotten at least one negativereference on somebody, I figured I hadn’t dug deep enough. Almost anybodywho’s been around at all or has tried to do something unusual has bentsomebody out of shape at one time or another or has been on the wrong sideof an argument. I generally learn much more from that than I learn from thebenefits I hear about.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I imagine too that the negativities didn’t necessarily discourage you. McMurtry: That’s right. No, you just need to understand that everyone’s complex andwhat is this person like? One thing that helped us a lot was we were, in thattime, unusually open with our entrepreneurs, in that when we were gettingclose to making an investment decision, we would tell them—look, here’s alist of references that you can call and then also talk to anybody else in theworld about us, because you need to understand who we are and how webehave, in particular how we behave when things are tough. So talk to thesepeople. I would always include on the list at least one name of someone whohad formerly run a company that we were invested in, and who we were partof removing that person from the enterprise, because that’s an important kindof person to talk to. If these people decide they don’t like you, how do theydeal with you? And how does all that happen?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What you’re talking about, it seems to me, is the fit between the venturecapitalists and the entrepreneurs. Is that widely understood?  McMurtry: I think nowadays it’s pretty widely understood.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did the former idea tend to be, we need to go out and find the money and whothe people are is not quite so important? McMurtry: Well, I think the earlier people in the venture business who did it wellunderstood it quite well, and developed those relationships. I certainlyunderstood it from early on. I think you can state it simply, and that is, ifyou’re going to be in business with someone, you really want them tounderstand as much about you, not from you, but from other people, as theypossibly can, because in that circumstance you are much less likely to surprisethem negatively in some way. And similarly, if I’m going to back anentrepreneur, I want to understand where that entrepreneur is coming fromand how does he or she behave in different circumstances, because again, Idon’t want to be surprised. I want to have a better frame of reference indealing with them. Frankly, a lot of very successful entrepreneurs are far from being super cockyand arrogant but are in fact reasonably insecure, lack confidence about theirability to really pull this thing off. And very often, at a time when things arerocky and someone dropping out of space might look at it and say, “Well, youneed to be really critical of that person because this thing isn’t working yet,” itmay be exactly the time you need to be highly supportive of that person andhighly encouraging that person to figure out how to focus on those few thingsthat are required to make this successful. There are, of course, other timeswhen you need to be very strongly critical.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, well, you had said in the first session that people were primary, not thatthat excludes other things as well. It’s interesting to hear you talk about morethan just sizing up the entrepreneur. The relationship is really more than abusiness relationship, isn’t it? McMurtry: Yes, oh yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You’re supporting the entrepreneur with far more than money. McMurtry: Oh much more so. And the great satisfaction for me in the venture businesswas observing and participating with the entrepreneurs, and watching themsucceed and watching them build teams, and having a role in that. That wasvery satisfying, although, as I think I mentioned in the first session, it wasvery satisfying but it was never convincing that you were really required.[laughter] But perhaps that’s true of a lot of important situations. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I was read the talk that you gave to the Houston Philosophical Society. Andyou made some disparaging remarks about the importance of the venturecapitalists in all this. McMurtry: [chuckling] I think I could comment on that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Here’s one quote, “Entrepreneurs drive the process, we,” meaning the venturecapitalists, “would be nowhere without them.” That is probably an extremestatement. [chuckling] McMurtry: No. Entrepreneurs do drive the process; venture guys would be no placewithout them. That’s for sure. Venture people can have a meaningful role andcan be very helpful to an enterprise. One thing that has happened as theventure business became a real business as opposed to a sort of a trade—anumber of people in the venture business, in building their franchises and inbuilding their images, have created a pretty big mystique about the ability ofventure capitalists to create industries and to create this and that. Frankly, there are a few people in the venture business who I think have comepretty close to demonstrating that, but when I say pretty close, I mean theywould never have been remotely close were it not for the entrepreneurs. Theycould identify entrepreneurs who perhaps shared a vision or accepted a visionthat led to great success. But a lot of what you hear about the way venturecapitalists started this company or started that company and created this ishugely revisionist history. But we’re all capable of that and it happenseverywhere.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Give me an example of somebody or somebodies, if you like, who you thinkhave had a larger-than-life role in starting a new industry or a new technology. McMurtry: I think Marquardt had some terrific vision in getting us involved withMicrosoft and with Sun and with other related companies that he has done. Ithink John Doerr at Kleiner Perkins has remarkable insights and has reallyhelped create some gigantic enterprises. I think Mike Moritz at Sequoia hasdone the same thing. I think Don Valentine and the rest of his team in theearly days of Sequoia and even the later days of Sequoia did some wonderfulthings. In fact, all of the pioneering VCs—Pitch, and Reid, and everybodyelse, have played that kind of a role at times. But I would continue to say thatthe clamor that you hear about venture capital nowadays places too muchemphasis on the venture capitalist and too little emphasis on the entrepreneurs.The venture capital firms who get that right are going to be the most attractive ones for the entrepreneurs; they’re going to get the better deals, and historywill sort of take care of itself.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I was reading Venture Capital at the Crossroads, which you probably knowbecause you’re part of it. McMurtry: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It mentions you and NBI as an example of what I guess I would justsummarize as this personal touch. The authors talked to people at NBI aboutwhat you brought to the firm, which was a lot of dedication and time, for one,and a lot of confidence that they were going to make it. Was that any sort ofexceptional dedication to that particular firm on your part? McMurtry: It was not exceptional dedication but it was an exceptionally positive result.The entrepreneurs who were there were more able to evolve and takeadvantage of opportunities and take useful advice and discard bad advice.Looking back on the period from ’75 when we invested, until I’ve forgottenexactly when I got off that board, but it was well after it was public in 1979,so probably ’80-’81. But it was a tremendously satisfying experience becausethe company had a couple of near-death experiences, and we had some majorrecruiting requirements that required unusual diligence. I had a lot ofinteraction with potential customers and just really knew the people in thecompany very, very well indeed. That is a case where I certainly didn’t createit, but the constructive role that a venture capitalist can play, with somededication is, for me, probably best exemplified in that firm, although therewere a number of others where I felt very good about what I was able toachieve. Companies that come to mind there are Nellcor and VeriFone andIntuit—really fun things to do.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: If this is the way you go about your investing, namely to spend whatever timeit seems to require, that in itself is going to be a limitation, isn’t it? McMurtry: It’s a definite limitation. We felt that—and most of our firms—if you could beon between six and eight boards at any one time, assuming that you’re onboards where you’re really actively involved, which is the only kind of thingwe did—that would continue to be a pretty tight constraint. I remember whenI was on eight boards at one time—you’ll always have at least one company insignificant trouble, and really just physically trying to manage your time sothat you have your brain in place to be able to deal with what’s going on at aparticular company for this period of time and then shift to that one, to thatone—it’s really strenuous. I’ve always been amazed at people who can be on twenty, twenty-five boards. But if you do it that way, you do a very differentmodel basically. But the model that I liked was one with intense involvement, and that isindeed very limiting in your time, which is the way we ended up withestimating how much money we could invest—how many partners are there,how many investments are we likely to make over a given period of time,what do we think is the average investment—not initial, but total at maturitythat we might make in that. Therefore, that adds up to a certain number, and ifyou’ve got four partners, it doesn’t add up to $300 million; it’s a lot less thanthat.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Enough time, maybe, to broach a question related to the article you gave me I wonder how you feelthat it fits or doesn’t fit with venture capital. Are there any territorialboundaries? Either mythical or aggressively protected? McMurtry: Oh, I think there are a lot of mythical boundaries, but my view is that angelinvesting is critical and highly desirable. A lot of angel investing in the pasthas been not particularly helpful investing, in the sense that the people doing itare doing it with a little bit of their money and a little tiny bit of their time andsort of spreading the bread on the water and yet aren’t that deeply involvedwith the enterprise. But that’s fine, because these entrepreneurs need access tocapital, and I am for anything that provides entrepreneurs with access tocapital. If angel investors waste some money because they invest in stuff thatshouldn’t be done, I think that’s net constructive because the entrepreneurs arelearning a great deal from that process.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And maybe also the venture capitalists don’t make that mistake if thecompany’s gone? [chuckling] McMurtry: Absolutely, absolutely, absolutely. A lot of venture capitalists have gotten sobig that they find it very, very hard to do anything like seed investing.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right, because it would just require so many different companies. McMurtry: So many companies and such relatively small amounts of money. So I thinkangel investors are very, very helpful. Unfortunately, they tend to flow withthe cycles. It would be nice if angel investing flowed against the cycle of Brent Bowers, “In Pitching to Angel Investors, Preparation Tops Zeal,” New York Times, June 11, 2009. venture, because that would smooth the access of funding for entrepreneurs.But in fact the angel investing flows very much with that cycle, so whenventure is booming, angels are booming, and when venture is tight, angels gounderground. I used to do some angel investing after TVI, but I pretty muchstopped doing it after a while because after the 2001 dotcom bubble burst andwe were in the doldrums, it was very hard to get paid for doing seed investing.A venture firm would decide to invest at the first round but they’d want toinvest at the same price or lower that had been invested earlier. That made,essentially, no sense for the seed investor.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It seems to me you very much like to have your hand on the gears, so tospeak, I mean to be deeply involved in advising a company. So it was okayjust to put your money in? McMurtry: It was all right to do that, because I had confidence in the other people thatwere doing it, and I deliberately decided not to go on any boards and not toget that personally committed because I was focused on other things. [technical interruption to change tape][End Audio File 3] Norton: This is tape number four, we’re still on June 30, and you two can continuetalking about angel investing and anything else.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: My very limited understanding of angel investing is that it is far more shortterm and less involved than what the typical venture capitalist would do. Itgets things started but without the idea of building the company over anumber of years. McMurtry: Yes, that tends to be the case. There are some exceptions to that. Some areangel investors who have maybe retired and enjoy doing [investments], andreally want to do it on their own and don’t want to be part of a venture fund,and have the resources to be able to commit. But by and large, angel investingis about seed-stage investing in companies where you put the money in andsort of check in now and then but really don’t expect to have any meaningfulrole. Occasionally with a group of angel investors, one of the angels mightdecide to agree to go on the board of directors of the company. That’s notuncommon but it’s not a requirement either. Angel investing typically is notintended to build the company in the way you described, in that they’re therefor the angel round and they don’t expect to be there for the third, fourthround of investing in the company. They hope that they will, essentially, seedsomething that can become so successful and be such an efficient user ofcapital that their early investment will ultimately be worth something and willnot be diluted out by all the additional capital that flowed in. There havecertainly been some marvelous examples of that, and it’s a very healthyphenomenon. It turns out there’s a man who I’ve lost track of—he was at the University ofNew Hampshire for a long time—who has tracked seed investing since beforeventure capital was being tracked very effectively and has been able to showthe role of seed investing in the American economy, which has been quitesignificant. And I’m blanking on the name, but the people at the NationalVenture Capital Association or people at the [Ewing Marion] KauffmanFoundation for Entrepreneurship would be able to get you information aboutwho has done some academic research on seed investing, because it’s veryimportant.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, that article in a very monetary way certainly verifies that. I was reallysurprised to read that seed investment is far more substantial than venturecapital investment. 60 McMurtry: Yes, yes. It really is and has been that way for quite some time. Well, anexample of that, as I mentioned in the first tape: when the GTE division that Iwas in was being sold, and I was thinking, in ’63, about starting a companyand needed some capital, I went to Houston and talked with Newton Rayzorwho was the Rice trustee I’d gotten to know quite well. He agreed in aconversation that they would provide financing, yet his name would nevershow up as a venture capitalist at all.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. Well, going back to the talk that you gave to the Houston PhilosophicalSociety, another thing you said, and I quote Dr. McMurtry, “Attitudes,” andyou were meaning to venture capital, “have changed since the bubble burstand that’s a good thing.” But you didn’t go on to explain why it was a goodthing. So would you do that? McMurtry: I can explain that, sure. Leading up to the dotcom—or part of the dotcombubble that occurred between ’95 and 2001, an enormous number ofcompanies was started and lots of money flowed into them. It was quite easyto raise money, and the Internet was just evolving and everything could bedone with the Internet. And so, people raised gigantic amounts of money andoften, because the markets were hot, could take the companies public in arelatively short period of time, even with modest, if any, results. And so some very bad attitudes developed, and that is, all of us should go startcompanies, and we should put some money into them, and then take thempublic as quickly as we can, and then try to cash out because money can bemade very, very quickly. And it was, in fact, about making money quickly. Itwas not about building a company; it was making money quickly. And ifmaking money quickly is relatively easy—which it was in that time frame—there’s a powerful incentive to try to make money quickly. People tend to pileinto that and do it until it crashes of its own weight, which is indeed whathappened. What I said in 2005, that the attitudes changed after the dotcom bubble, Imeant that the idea that let’s just start something to make money in a shortperiod of time, like a couple of years, went away completely. It just wentaway completely. Wanting to do it didn’t go away, but the prospect for beingable to do it went away. Therefore attitudes had to change, because if it’s nolonger possible, as much as I might like to do it, I’m not going to go there.And so, if I’m going to start something, I’d better be in it to try to build abusiness. And because the markets post-the bubble were not very good, I can’texpect to sell this to anybody any time soon; I’m going to have to stay with itfor quite some period of time. And so I’m back into the company-buildingmode and counting on the fact that if I build value, then it will ultimately—notnecessarily today [in the current recession]—but it will ultimately berecognized, and I will ultimately be rewarded for it. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, from talking to your generation of venture capitalists, that seems to be apervasive concept. McMurtry: It is.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, there are several things going on here, as I se it. You said last time that,in the end, you’re in this business to make money. That it’s your responsibilityto make money because you have investors. But at the same time, it’s veryclear to me that almost of equal importance is building the company. And sothis bubble and what it did to people’s attitudes, was that an aberration? McMurtry: Absolutely. But we create aberrations and we create bubbles. Human naturecreates bubbles and human nature creates deep valleys of the kind that wewere in in ’73 and ’74, when it was clear one would be crazy to do venturecapital or one would be crazy to start a company. The attitudes come and go,and I think we’re in a more healthy situation now than we’ve been for sometime.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But the way I’ve taken it from what you’ve said is that it wasn’t that venturecapitalists just resolved to be more—I don’t know if ethical is the word—butthey were forced into it by market conditions. McMurtry: Yes, yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So I’m wondering—and this is a segue into your association with the twoventure capital associations: the National Venture Capital Association[NVCA] and the Western Association of Venture Capitalists [WAVC]. Dothose organizations make any effort to educate the young blood presumablycoming into venture capital that it’s just not a matter of making money, it’s amatter of also building companies, and that’s your responsibility as well. McMurtry: That used to be strictly a self-selection process. But some work did begin latein my venture career, some work began that had been begun by someone elsethat was joined into by the National Venture Capital Association, in whichthere were actually programs put together in the summer, I think, withexperienced venture capitalists, to train younger venture capitalists or peoplewho were interested in the venture capital business. The KauffmanFoundation has done some things with internships as well, that have beenvery— I’m not current on these but I would look up all of that. As often happens when a small guild—which is what venture capital was—becomes a trade, becomes a business, then the educational discipline doesevolve, and that has evolved. I’m not current with what’s there, but there aresome very useful things. And not the least being some very useful classes inbusiness schools now, about entrepreneurship and about venturing. Duringmost of my venture career, up through the mid-nineties when I was superactive in new funds, business schools had anecdotal-type classes that werevery popular and taught well. In fact, Pitch Johnson taught a class at Stanfordfor many years. It was very highly received but was viewed by the academicsas anecdotal: this is not a business discipline; this is a series of anecdotes. Itwas very interesting that it took until about a decade ago for the StanfordGraduate School of Business to embrace entrepreneurship as an academicdiscipline. And they’re doing some very, very good work in that area.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I sat in on a course on entrepreneurship, taught by Mario [M.] Rosati, at Haas. McMurtry: Oh yes!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: He did, I thought, a wonderful job. Venture capital was definitely part of it,and definitely building companies was part of his message.During those years of the bubble, people must have flocked into venturecapital with very little background whatsoever. McMurtry: Oh they did, oh they did. If you look at the amount of money that was raisedin venture capital up to and through the bubble—gigantic amounts of moneywere raised, multiple new funds were started, and a lot of those willeventually go away. They don’t go away quickly, unfortunately, because youget the funding, you draw down the funding, and you can be around for areally long time. So there’s this huge wad of money still in the venture cyclethat needs to—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But they’ll be winnowed out. McMurtry: I think it’ll be winnowed out over time, but the time constant is longer thanyou might like to see it. It takes longer.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: The companies are there for a while, aren’t they! [chuckling] McMurtry: They are there for a while. That’s right. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: We could go on forever about venture capital, per se. Do you think we’vegotten the gist? McMurtry: I think so.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I’d like to talk about the larger context. We mentioned Reid Dennis’s work atthe federal level and some of the legislation. What we didn’t mention, is theeffect of Sarbanes-Oxley. Do you have opinions? I’ll bet you do. McMurtry: I have an opinion. I have an opinion which is less informed than it would be ifI were still on public company boards. But I was on public company boards, acouple of them, after Sarbanes-Oxley was passed, and it had some prettyimmediate impacts on those companies. The immediate impact was toincrease, quite dramatically, the amount of money that the company needed tospend in its auditing procedures, and a lot of the paperwork that had to beprovided. On balance, I think Sarbanes-Oxley, by my standards, went way toofar in trying to address some old problems with rules and regulations whichcould be satisfied by spending large amounts of money on consultants andemployees, but which had the impact, if anything, of diffusing responsibilityat the time it needed to be focusing it. It really diffused the responsibility andyet focused the responsibility on the CEO and the chief financial officer, whocan go to prison quite easily for simple mistakes that might be made in theorganization. And if the idea is to make the guy in charge accountable at allcosts and independent of what’s going on—and I think that was partly whatwas in mind of the people who were passing it—then I think it works. It’s sortof too much, I’m afraid, and particularly younger companies where things arein fact simpler, do not need to be complicated by a lot of extra rules andreporting.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And also the expense, I imagine. McMurtry: And the expense is hopeless. So I’m very grateful that I’m not involved as adirector of any public company at this point. It has become highlyburdensome, and I’m afraid unnecessarily so.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Sarbanes-Oxley was in large part a reaction to some of the malfeasance thathad been so obvious—Enron and WorldCom, et cetera. McMurtry: Right. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you feel at the time, and do you feel now, that the government shouldhave taken some sort of action? McMurtry: Oh I think they had to take action. An appropriate question is, how would Irewrite Sarbanes-Oxley to address the problems that they’re trying to address,but also not to unnecessarily burden emerging companies. I don’t know theanswer to that, but my guess is there are some pretty good answers to that. Ihope that people who are involved in these companies and in the industrygroups will be able to do some effective lobbying to get some of the ruleschanged in ways that will be constructive, without diluting the impact of whatis trying to be accomplished.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Are you optimistic that the Obama administration will move things forward? McMurtry: I’m just not well enough informed. The Obama administration and theCongress are obviously, given the downturn we’ve been through and thereaction they’ve had, they’re obviously willing to act. And I support thatstrongly. My concern is that since they are so willing to act by nature, theywill be willing to do a lot more at the federal level than is, in fact,constructive. But you can’t control that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What is there about this region that has become a high-technology center?Does that automatically mean that there’s going to be a venture capital arm inthe region? McMurtry: I think it does mean that there will be a venture capital arm in the region, andthat it follows the entrepreneurs. And so the question you need to ask is, whatinstitutional structures, legal structures, governance, and so on, would berequired in order to stimulate, in order to create a climate that will attractpotential entrepreneurs? And the answer to that from experience that we cansee is tquality universities and a reasonably welcoming business climate.AnnaLee Saxenian, at Berkeley, has written some very interesting booksabout comparative advantage of different [regions]—one that goes back to avery interesting book about comparing Silicon Valley and Route 128 inBoston. [Culture and Competition in Silicon Valley and Route 128.]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh yes, Saxenian’s book. McMurtry: At the time that they were both very strong and before Silicon Valley simplywent way beyond anything that was going on there. I think Berkeley andStanford and others have had a huge impact in attracting the kind of peoplewho will naturally be entrepreneurs; they’re bright and energetic and ambitious and fearless to some extent. And the Boston area did the samething. The biggest concentration in Texas is around the University of Texas atAustin. A lot of it is that these are attractive places to live as well. But I’m notsure what all creates it. One thing I am quite sure about is that where the entrepreneurs are, venturecapitalists will follow. You can plant venture capital all over the place andfind that it’s not going to work. There’s a man, a very interesting man, in SanFrancisco named Phil [Philip] Horsley, with a firm called Horsley Bridge[Partners]. They are a fund of funds; that is, they take money frominstitutional investors and they invest it in venture capital funds. They’ve beendoing that for more than thirty years and doing it very successfully. And theyalso have a fantastic database of the performance of all the funds they’veinvested in in the venture capital industry in general, and they’re just reallyknowledgeable. If you want to talk to people who are firsthand knowledgeableabout the evolution and state of the venture capital industry, Phil Horsley andhis team would be a very good place to start. They’re on Sansome, I think, inSan Francisco. If you have any trouble finding them, let me know.But Horsley Bridge came up because I saw Phil at a meeting a few weeks ago,and people were talking about venture capital and the geography. He pointedout that in the early days of their fund, one of the earlier funds in the eighties,they decided that they really wanted broad geographic diversification andindustry diversification and startups versus later stage investments. Theywanted a broadly diversified portfolio, and so they deliberately went aroundthe country, and they seeded venture capital operations, started venture capitaloperations, or provided money to people who were doing venture capital, inlots and lots of different places all over the United States. And what theyfound, after a substantial period of time, was that they should haveconcentrated all of their funding in Silicon Valley and along parts of the EastCoast, in Boston. What they demonstrated, in a pretty direct way, was at leastduring that time frame, and I would argue for all time frames, you can providethe capital, but you can’t create the entrepreneurs. And yet if the entrepreneursare there, the capital will come. Those of us from Silicon Valley were very grateful that the establishedventure capital funds on the East Coast in Boston and in New York and inChicago did not choose to set up significant offices in Silicon Valley early on.Now they’ve all done it later, but much, much, much later. They gave us—sort of the uneducated local venture guys were given a huge runway to try toget themselves established in a way that would have been harder if there hadbeen a sophisticated presence. People did have a presence but it was typicallya small office, a single-person office. But the main thing was people wouldgenerally fly out from the East Coast to work with the companies in SiliconValley. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is there a style out here? Or maybe something even more substantial than thatthat distinguishes how venture capital operates on the West Coast as opposedto anywhere else? McMurtry: Yes. I’m not sure if this is still true, but in the old days of the business, theEast Coast venture capitalists tended to be more, I would say, aloof withrespect to their companies; they were viewed as investments as opposed to ourview that we were getting into a partnership with an entrepreneur to try tocreate something together. It was a more formal relationship, characteristic ofattitudes in general on the East Coast compared to the West Coast.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I brought up the two venture capital organizations, and there’s really nottime to do them due justice, but you headed both of them at one time oranother. Is their agenda, their purpose also different? McMurtry: Relatively different. The Western Association of Venture Capitalists has beenmuch more focused on building relationships among the venture individuals,particularly in Silicon Valley.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Amongst themselves? Or with entrepreneurs? McMurtry: Amongst themselves more than anything else, and trying to reinforce anetwork of venture capitalists who can call on each other, who will trust eachother, who will share deals and so on. It started out to be really quite a smallclub and a useful thing to get to know other people who were trying to do thiscrazy thing you were trying to do. As it evolved, the Western Association hasbecome more involved with some political issues, with some business practiceissues, with anything that influences—legislation that influences the ability ofentrepreneurs to get access to capital. They’ve been willing to get involved inthat. That came much later. The National Venture Capital Association, from its earliest beginnings in the1970s, early seventies, got focused on what were some of the public policyissues that were important inhibitors to venture capital. One of those turnedout to be high capital gains taxes, another one turned out to be the inability ofpension funds to be able to invest in ventures. So a lot of the initial energy ofthe leadership in the National Venture Capital Association was directedtoward those issues, and they did it very successfully, and they’ve continuedto do that. I was involved with the National Venture Capital Association for many yearsand was president in ’87 and chairman in ’88, or something like that. Theyears before that, I was involved with part of the legislative arm and we would run tours for people from the government, from both branches of thelegislature plus executive branch people—anybody we could get to come toCalifornia. We would have them come and look at companies. We’d see fivecompanies in a day if they had a day. I would arrange with the companies atdifferent stages—tiny and raw startup to a more mature company. I wouldarrange with the entrepreneur— I would tell them a little bit about who theperson was, what they were here for, but mainly they want to know whatyou’re doing, why you’re doing it, and is there anything the government coulddo that might help you out or inhibit you? And it was an eye-openingexperience for these congressmen and senators and executive branch peoplewho came out.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, I bet. McMurtry: It was a very constructive thing to do, and I think the NVCA is probably stilldoing that kind of thing. I distinctly remember a very senior senator who cameout and was intrigued by talking to these crazy people who had startedcompanies. We would finish with a small dinner in Palo Alto with just the fiveentrepreneurs, the head of the NVCA, and the visitor. During one of themeetings, the senator said to the entrepreneur, “Who told you you could dothis?” It was a very legitimate question—who gave you permission to do this?Because the idea that you would just go start a company sounded almostsubversive! Wait a minute! And at first the entrepreneur didn’t understand thequestion and then did get it—you’ve got to get a business license, and you’vegot to get a lawyer, and you’ve got to get— But you just go do it. You just godo it.And one of the most positive features of the USA, and in this area inparticular, has been we have a climate and a rule of law that you can afford todo something like that. If you start it, nobody’s going to steal it from you. Ifyou start it, nobody’s going to extort you. It was absolutely amazing that inmy entire business career I never was exposed to a situation where anyonewas asking for a bribe or a deal on the side. Now, it apparently goes on all thetime in some parts of the country, and I’ve been sheltered not to have to be inthat environment. But what a delightful state it is to be in that [my] situation!Because you’re going to make enough mistakes and errors that you’re goingto lose an enormous amount even when you’re trying your best and evenwhen the laws and so on are helpful to you. The parasitic behavior ofextortion or bribes—that adds a level of ugliness and complexity that prettydramatically increases the chances of failure, I think.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Venture capital is spreading its tentacles out into other parts of the world.That’s a relatively new phenomenon, isn’t it?  McMurtry: It is. It is.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is venture capital going to be different because the context is so different, thelaw is so different, the culture is different? McMurtry: Oh I think both laws and culture play a huge role in the ability to transport anidea like venture capital, and I hope it can be successful in other places. Thereare some examples of that happening in societies that are not particularlyopen, in particular in China, and I think that’s very encouraging.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But you yourself haven’t been involved with overseas ventures? McMurtry: No, I would be terrified of that because of my lack of knowledge of what isreally going on on the ground.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [To Linda Norton] How much more time do we have? McMurtry: We can wrap up anytime.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I wanted to hear a little about extracurricular activities? I know you’ve beenvery active in connection with Stanford, and that you were president of theirboard at one stage. Can you say what you think you might have brought toStanford? McMurtry: Yes. Before I was retired from the venture capital business, I went on theboard of trustees of Rice University in Houston and was on that board for afew years—a number of years. I really found that I was pleased to be therebecause I had a very high opinion of the place and wanted them to continue tosucceed and excel. It was clear that a lot of what I had learned in venturingand in understanding the governance structure for an effective company—a lotof that would carry over into governance of a nonprofit organization like auniversity. And some of the things that were more common in industry at thattime and were less common in universities could be really helpful, such as theideas of the importance of strategic planning, ideas such as explicit evaluationof the performance of the leadership of the organization and feedback withrespect to that, and just a lot of deliberate thoughts about governance andstructure that could be very helpful.  But I particularly enjoyed it because the people involved are highly energetic,very bright, trying to do the right thing, and doing wonderful work for theirstudents and creating good research along the way.I got involved on the Stanford board after I’d been on the Rice board almostten years and found that I could be on both boards without any meaningfulconflict, other than once I was on both boards, I knew that I couldn’tcommunicate anything about one of the universities to the other. Period. Justbecause you have a natural conflict. But anybody who wanted to talk tosomebody at Stanford, I could encourage them to talk to somebody or viceversa. But I found it no conflict at all and found the Stanford board a reallyterrific bunch of people as well. At that stage, the Stanford board was muchfarther along in its evolution of governance practices, and so on, than the Riceboard had been, although the Rice board has done dramatic improvementsthere. I served on both those boards and also on the board of the Carnegie Institutionof Washington [Carnegie Institution for Science], which is a researchorganization with laboratories around the country, including a plant biologylaboratory here at Stanford and a global ecology lab. I found that working ingovernance, being on the board of institutions that were well led withimportant charters and important outputs in terms of research and students,was very satisfying and educational as well. I learned an enormous amountfrom that. I did that until I became chairman of the board at Stanford in 2004,and then I stepped off the Rice board and off the Carnegie board and focusedtotally on Stanford until my term ended there at the end of ’04.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Your reason for withdrawing from Rice and Carnegie? McMurtry: The reason for that was once I was chairman at Stanford I really felt I had todevote all of my time and attention to that. It was inappropriate not to betotally focused there, and it was very enjoyable to do that as well. So I found itreally useful. I’ve also found that having spent seventeen years on the Riceboard and eleven years on the Stanford board and—I’ve forgotten howmany—seven or so on that Carnegie board—I learned a lot from [them],developed some great relationships which are sustaining, and I’m very, veryhappy that other people are now involved in the governance. There’s a time todo these things, and for me, even though I have a lot of energy and ambitionabout things that I want to do in the future, the governance phase of my lifefor nonprofits is, I think, over. I’ve done that and I’m looking to do otherthings.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Then briefly, what about philanthropic activities? Are you engaged there? 70 McMurtry: We’ve been quietly, very interested in philanthropy since we first began tohave any assets. The first thing that we did when we had anything other thancurrently disposable income was we set up scholarships at Rice, because Ricein 1965 began charging tuition. It had been tuition-free when we were there,which is why we went. And so we set up scholarships in honor of Deedee’sparents and my parents. They’re endowed and still running at Rice.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: For undergraduates? McMurtry: For undergraduates, yes. We felt obligated and very pleased to be able to dothat. We also funded a professorship in engineering at Rice and then laterfunded a professorship in the humanities. These are endowed professorships,and we have done a lot of other funding of various things at Rice. At Ricewe’re currently funding the development of a new residential college livingsituation that will be opening in August of this year. At Stanford we’ve been very involved with a lot of different things. I think thefirst thing we gave any money to was the Lively Arts program at Stanford,which is all of the wonderful musical and dance and other groups that theybring to the campus. We’ve been involved with engineering—we endowed achair in engineering there in the mid-eighties. We have provided funding tothe athletic department, to the Hoover Institution, to the Stanford Institute forEconomic Policy Research [SIEPR], to the art museum [Cantor Art Center].We’ve agreed to fund a new art building at Stanford, which will be builtbeginning in a couple of years, which is going to be very exciting. One thingthat Deedee and I will be spending our time on over the next several years ishelping to plan and execute that art building, which will be able to consolidatein one facility all of the different art activities at Stanford in a building thatwill be right adjacent to the Cantor Center, which is the museum.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Have you chosen an architect? McMurtry: No, I have not chosen an architect yet. We’re still working on that. But we’vealso been very involved with our church in Menlo Park—the Menlo ParkPresbyterian Church—for many, many years, and we’ve been involved with alot of different groups. If you look at our philanthropy, it is almost all about education as a tool foreconomic mobility. So we’ve also backed some things—people like VillageEnterprise Fund who are involved with microlending in Africa. We’ve backedthings like the Habitat for Humanity, which is a terrific program for buildinghousing. We’ve backed the American Conservatory Theater in San Francisco,[which] is something we’ve enjoyed for years. My wife has been involved with them on the board there for a number of years, and so we’ve been veryhappy supporters there. We’ve been supporting the Oregon ShakespeareFestival as well, and then a lot of entrepreneurial organizations—theentrepreneurs’ fund [Entrepreneurs Foundation] that Gib Myers set up—afoundation that helps companies get more entrepreneurial earlier.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh yes, he talked about that. McMurtry: There are a bunch of other related things. But the biggest chunks of thephilanthropy have gone, and are going, to Rice and to Stanford in a variety ofdifferent areas, and a lot of it in scholarships, but also in other areas. It’s beenfantastic to be in a position to be able to give back. We’ve been verydeliberate about our philanthropy, in that we tend not to give just becausethere’s a need—because there are so many needs you would be completelyoverwhelmed by that. We’ve tended to give where we feel the people whowill receive the gift will make unusual use of the gift and can really achievesomething that couldn’t otherwise be achieved. And we can get a lot ofpleasure from observing how that works.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I imagine there’s some interplay with your venture capital experience. McMurtry: With your charitable dollars, you’ve got a lot of the same issues.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, we’d probably better wind up, but I should give you a chance to saywhat you want to say without my prompting. McMurtry: I think I have very little to say other than one thing that came to mind as wewere talking a few minutes ago. I stumbled into what has been the mostdelightful virtuous cycle that one could find. That is, being in the venturecapital business because I loved starting things and helping to createcompanies, so I could be doing with my time those things that I most enjoyeddoing. It turned out to be, financially, enormously rewarding—well beyondanything that I would have ever imagined or set as a target or an objective.And that virtuous cycle is one that very few people are privileged to enjoy. Idid not seek it; I stumbled into it but thrived within it, and continue to enjoythe benefits of it and continue to enjoy the process of that creativity.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Very nice note to end. I thank you. McMurtry: Thank you. Great. Well, thank you guys for taking all the time. 
 Johnson: [adjusting his clothing] Remember that guy in that movie who sat on his coat?The one where they said, “I’m mad as hell and I’m not going to take it anymore.” There was a news commentator in there. They were teaching that whenyou sit at the desk, like an anchorperson, you sit on your coattails so that itpulls your coat down. All right. I’m ready!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] Well, you mentioned as we were talking before the recording thatyour family goes way back to the 1600s. Johnson: It goes back to primeval times, actually!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, well, true. In this country, I should have said. Johnson: This guy John Johnson came over, I don’t know quite why, religion, I don’tknow what, or opportunity, but he came to New England, to Ipswich in 1635,so I think I’m fourteen generations later. I’m very proud of that family, not forthe usual reasons—because they were artisans and workmen and the kind ofpeople that built the country. They later on became bankers, and stuff likethat, in smaller towns and small cities like Decatur, Illinois. There are dozens,hundreds of families like this, came early, worked the fields, worked atcarpentry and built the country, both literally and figuratively. It’s nothing,except I have pride in it. It doesn’t affect my own life very much. It gives meacceptability when I go to a dinner in New England once in a while, that’sabout it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] Where did they come from? Johnson: They came from a place called Herne Hill in Kent. I visited there, a littletown, it isn’t much bigger than it was in 1635—has about three pubs and threechurches and about, I don’t know, 1500 people. Even clay pipes from thoseold days were still—I dug some out of the dirt. So that town isn’t changedmuch.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, skipping through time, I know from my research that you were born inIllinois. Johnson: I was born in Quincy, Illinois. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, and how had the family gotten there? Johnson: Well, how that happened is—my dad’s from St. Louis, my mother’s fromQuincy, although she was born in Indian Territory in a place called Muskogee,Okalahoma. So the short version of my parents is my mother was born inMuskogee, which was then Indian Territory in 1903; my dad in 1901 in St.Louis. They both went to the university. Mother later moved to Quincy—andwent to the University of Illinois and met my dad there. My dad was a majortrack star, a hurdler with the Olympic team of 1924, if you remember theChariots of Fire movie. He was on that team. So I grew up, and he became a track and field coach. He went to DrakeUniversity to start with after being an assistant at Illinois in 1928, and I wasborn shortly after that. But my grandfather was a doctor so my mother wentback to Quincy about the time I was about to arrive—I think to save money totell you the truth! [chuckling] So I grew up, until I was twelve in 1940, in DesMoines and became aware, like all kids, that there was a track team and thenthere’s other sports teams. And I learned there’s a university, and then Ilearned there are businessmen—so you burrow outwards from yourbackground. So track and field—I was born into it , and I’ve followed itclosely ever since.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You were a runner. Johnson: I was a Stanford track athlete. I sort of assumed since my dad was an Olympicathlete I’d be that good, but I wasn’t. I was a nationally-ranked 400-meterrunner, 440-yard runner, but didn’t make it to the Olympics.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that a disappointment to your father? Johnson: He never expressed it. In 1940 he came to Stanford to be the coach, but by thetime I went to Stanford he had left Stanford after the war and was doing otherthings. So my coach was a fine man, but not my dad. My dad alwaysemphasized grades and studies and other things. He never emphasized—heknew very well, it turned out, that I wanted to run and I did run. He came tomy meets and always watched, not all of them but many of them. I don’t thinkhe was disappointed, in most ways, because I did have a good academic careerat Stanford. The thing that was so good about being on the track team, I didn’thave to pay any tuition. I had a scholarship. Our family means were modestenough so that was a huge help to my parents. I what they call “hashed,”which is like working waiting tables and stuff, but the combination of somemoney from home and my scholarship and my work, I got through Stanford with only had one semester where I had to borrow money from the university.I was studying mechanical engineering.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now why mechanical engineering? Johnson: Well, when I went to Palo Alto High School, we had a really superb physicsteacher there named Henry Martin. Everyone has this story in his or her life,had some great teacher that really influenced you, gave you understandingabout something. I really felt at the high school level I understood physics. Atthe same time, that was when the A-bomb was going off and RobertOppenheimer, who later became [the subject of] an opera, I might add, wasfamous. But I became interested in the physical sciences and loved mathanyway. When I went to Stanford, I decided I’d be a physics major, and it took me onlya couple of years to decide that I wasn’t Robert Oppenheimer and I wasn’tEinstein. I was a good but not top-level physicist type of person. By then I’dmet a friend of my dad’s who was a superintendent of a steel mill, and I beganto think—at some point it strikes you—I’ve got to have a job some day. So Iswitched to engineering, figuring that somehow that that could lead to someactive employment, because I didn’t really think that I would be a successfulacademic physicist—and I wouldn’t have been, I don’t think. I did well in my engineering courses, and so I had a nice balance, I thought,between my academic life and my fraternity life. It was a wonderfullymeaningful experience to be in my fraternity house. It was the home awayfrom home. It’s the first time you leave home—and you don’t have to be in afraternity to have this experience. I did—a bunch of brothers that I’m close tothese days! So the third part of it was, I’d say, the social side of it, with asmall s for sure. And then being on the track team and the effort that went intothat. Some rewards from winning some good races. I had a good nationallevel success, not international, so that was satisfying but frustrating toobecause I wanted to do better. I graduated from Stanford in 1950, and without going through all the stories ofit, I got into Harvard Business School.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now why business school? Johnson: Well, at that point another thing happened in my life. As I studied engineeringand did design work and met a number of guys from all over the countrywhose fathers were doing different things, or families, and some guys werebusinessmen, some people I knew well were—so I began to realize that Ireally hadn’t thought much about the business world. It wasn’t part of my childhood. My mom was an English teacher and my dad was a coach. Theywere respectful of—they weren’t anti-business—they just weren’t thatbusinesslike. Then I began to meet people who were. My first thought was tobe a ranger and to be a forest service type of guy. But I decided not to do thatleap. I was thinking about going to Oregon State which I could do. They had agood track team in those days—it doesn’t have one now—and could do thatand study forestry. But then I saw in my many summers in the mountains,which I did hiking, I saw the rangers had to pick up a lot of garbage, so Idecided that wasn’t going to be what I wanted to do. What I didn’t know—every profession, you have to pick up some garbage! [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You learned that! Johnson: I learned that. But anyway, I switched to engineering, and then I began to getthe idea of why don’t I make a decent salary and make some money? And thatnever was part of—I don’t know how to explain it, but our family had a goodlife. We were never poor but the orientation was not to—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: To make money. Johnson: Was not money. Business school seemed like the way. Then I began to realizethat production interested me, being a production executive. Making thingsinterested me. I spent a summer working in a steel mill, and I just like thatatmosphere of the smoke and the flames. It seemed glamorous to me. A lot ofguys found consulting and investment banking glamorous. But [I liked] beingwith those kind of people that worked hard, and I loved exercise anyway. Ithought well, gee, if I can find a job where I can do both, have a pathway toget promoted and to do physical work and to be with those kinds of peoplethat worked in the mills which are mostly superb men in almost every case. SoI switched to engineering. I had switched to engineering before that, but then Irealized that I wanted to go to business school because I realized that thatwould open up other horizons and [I would] learn about other things. So the two eye openers, I would say, that occurred to me from a technologyoriented high school era—leaving athletics aside for the time; that was just anextra thing—were the courses they made you take, Western Civ. and thosethings. What a drag, I thought, to study all these old guys in Italy and all thatstuff. It turned out, of course, as practically everyone says, it opened up therest of my life later! [chuckling] So I loved that—I didn’t like it when I tookit, but I did well with it. To an engineer it almost seems like soft stuff. Then Itook some other courses, and naturally English and all that, so Stanford wasgood about making the engineers have a broader education. It was very, verywise of them.  You also had to take engineering accounting—you didn’t have to take it but itwas offered, and engineering economics you had to take. So as an engineer atStanford, no matter whether it was electrical or mechanical or civil[engineering], which were the three main branches in those days, or industrial,you had a sort of an economic and non-technology side to your engineeringtraining that was very helpful later.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now was that unusual in engineering schools at that time? Johnson: I can’t answer that. I don’t know, but I think it was unusual. Dean Terman wasour dean, Frederick [E.] Terman, whose father was a very famouspsychologist, I might add.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right. Johnson: [He] had a broad view of education, and so he was quite insistent on havingtopflight technological instruction in math. But he supported fully theuniversity’s requirement that engineers had to take Western Civilization andEnglish and other stuff. So that was a good part of going to Stanford. Then the idea of going to business school—I didn’t get in at first becausewhen I interviewed for the business school, I told the interviewer, whose namewas Saltonstall by the way—he was some relation to the old Saltonstalls—hesaid, “What is it you really want to do with your career?” I said, “I don’tknow.” It was a very honest answer, “But I want to go to business schoolbecause I’d like to learn some other facets of things I can do with my lifebeyond being an engineer.” It was exactly the truth. Wrong. [chuckling] So Igot a nice letter from them saying, “The interviewer liked blah, blah, blah, butno, you can’t get in because you don’t seem to be focused enough on whatyou want to do.” Then I went back to Washington, DC to run in the national AAV track andfield meet. I jumped on an airplane and went up to see the admissions officerat Harvard. I didn’t exactly pound on his desk, I said, “Are you kidding? I gottop grades, I’m a nationally-ranked athlete, and as far as doing the classroomwork, I’m the kind of guy you want around here.” Sort of—what’s the matterwith you? I didn’t quite say it that way but that was my tone. I scrambled around and tried to get people to write letters for me to say theyfelt [Harvard] should have let me in. One of my fraternity brother’sgirlfriend’s father was a prominent guy, so I went out and interviewed himand he helped me. But in the end, they let me in. Lewis [B.] Ward was theadmissions director, so when I got in in the fall I went to see him and I saidthank you. He said, “Well, you were very convincing when you came up here! We do look for drive and desire. That’s a pretty important part of it. So youshowed the fact you really wanted to come here. Just do me a favor—don’ttell other people how it worked, will you? I’ll have every guy up herepounding on my desk.” It was kind of an example that if you stay after thingsand you’re persistent and you have zeal and desire, it shows through and youcan do things. I don’t know that I learned a lesson, because I think I was that way to startwith. I wasn’t one of the top students, but I was a good student at businessschool and graduated okay, and then I went in the air force. I had thesebroadening experiences: from an athletics-oriented kid who liked math andscience in high school to somebody who had stuck with the technology side ofit but had the breadth of a Stanford education. They do it differently now, butI’m sure they have an emphasis on breadth still. Then broadening my businessideas by going to business school, [where] I did do what I hoped [to do]. Ilearned a lot about finance; I learned a lot about other things. A lot of guyswanted to go into consulting and investment banking, perfectly importantprofessions for our society. But I still stuck with my engineering [orientation]and I got a job. I went in the air force because it was the Korean War andbecame a maintenance officer.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, don’t go there quite yet. Johnson: Okay. I should wait for the questions.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I happen to know that you took a course from Georges [F.] Doriot. Johnson: I did, yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And he being the name that he is, I’d be interested in hearing yourimpressions of him and the way he taught his course. Johnson: Well, the course was called manufacturing and I took it because it had thatname.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But not because you knew of him? Johnson: I knew about him as the founder of American Research and Development[Corporation], which was very much a pioneer venture firm, but I didn’t knowanything about venture capital. It had been named in the early forties, by aprofessor—I believe his name was [George] Elton Mayo, who coined theterm— <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What was his connection? Johnson: I don’t know. I know that he’s credited with inventing the name. I now knowfrom books I read later that people were doing deals and backing venturesway back in the nineteenth century. There’s a terrific book called, The VisibleHand: [The Managerial Revolution in American Business], whichdescribed—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh yes—[Alfred Dupont] Chandler. Johnson: Exactly. Everybody reads a few books that give them insights, and that bookwas a very important book to me, not so much that I realized how businessorganizations began to change marketplaces, because I realized what wasgoing on back as soon as technology began to become— Well, technology hasalways been there, but new technologies: oil drilling, steel making, and thosethings created business opportunities, although I read that book much later, Imight add.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I’ve read that in those very early days, it was usually the very wealthy familiesthat were doing the investment. Is that what Chandler says as well? Johnson: That’s right, yes. When I first heard about it, the Rockefeller family—Laurance Rockefeller himself did investments, Eastern Airlines and someother things. There was another family or two whose names I can’t recall rightnow—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, the Whitneys were— Johnson: The Whitneys were doing that, yes. There were three or four families ofmeans, and they backed businesses, not necessarily small businesses, but Ididn’t know much about that when I enrolled in the course. I took the courseswe had to take the first year: marketing, finance, and administrative practices,which is kind of a human relations course, and other stuff. So I had thefundamental tools that they wanted every first-year student to have. Second[year], you could branch out, and surprisingly enough, I took some financecourses just because they were interesting. I’ve always liked numbers so theywere pretty numbery.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All these courses that you were taking, did they actually help you later on?  Johnson: Much later on, much later on, Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, go back to Doriot’s course, though. Johnson: Okay. The good part is he was very devoted to his students. He cared a lotabout students. He was a man you could go see and talk to. That was true ofmost of the professors, but Georges Doriot cared about that. And hismanufacturing course was not a course about making anything; it was a courseabout his ideas about business and his philosophies. Some of it was just plainbaloney, like [imitating Doriot’s French accent] “Never trust a man who wearsa bow tie.” He thought that bow ties were a symbol of some sort of frivolousor not standard behavior, so I think he didn’t want people to be different fromothers. Then he said, “Remember there’s a great tape recorder going all the time,”which is fairly true. So what he was saying is, “Behave yourself, because ifyou’re going to cut corners, you can’t.” So I think as a moral leader he wasvery strong and that was good. In fact, it was vital. I don’t remember therebeing much discussion directly about ethics at the business school, butindirectly very much so and in the courses. But I think that course could havebeen condensed into about five sessions, because he would ramble on an on. Idon’t want to sound like I didn’t respect him, because I did. I respected hisethical standards; I respected his caring about the students, but a lot of what hesaid to me sounded like baloney, and much of it was. I remember one incident in which he said, “When you go to a new town,” Iwon’t imitate his accent because that’s too cheap, but I’ll say what he said andthat is, “When you go to a new town and you want to get known and meetpeople, start your job and then when some prominent man dies, write thewidow a letter and say that while you didn’t know her husband, you knowhow important he was to the town.” He said, “Almost surely she’ll write youback and that gives you a chance then to meet people of substance in thecommunity.” I was offended. I hate it now, I hated it then. I thought it wassome of the worst advice you could possibly get, and here’s this man who isdeeply ethical himself. There’s no question about that; he’s demonstrated it inmany ways—to give some advice like that which was a little too pragmatic forme or for many of my classmates. We marveled at that, and as you can see, Istill remember every word of that advice. It was terrible advice! But most of the class was about working hard, achieving goals, settinggoals—setting goals and achieving goals and about behaving yourself. And hegave that in different ways, but he did throw a little baloney in there becausehe was a human being. I had other professors, I felt, that did a much better jobof preparing me with things I didn’t know. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why does Doriot’s name stand out to such a degree? Johnson: Because he taught so many guys for so long, and I think many people feeldifferently from the way I do. They believe that his guidance and what he saidwas important and gave them insight into the way the world and businessworks that they wouldn’t have had without him—and that’s true. Heunderstood the subtle side of it, the politics of business, the behavioral part ofit, the getting to be known and making your way—and this great taperecorder, it’s true. All the Harvard Business School guys you talk to will havetaken that course and they’re going to have different views about it. I have amixed review that comes out plus because of the ethical guidance and his deeppersonal interest in the students.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, well, that’s a great credit to him. Johnson: I think so, I think so. He’s remembered well there, and he also started the firstventure capital company I ever heard of, American Research andDevelopment.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: When you were there? Johnson: My class was ’52. I think he started it along about the time we were there,maybe before ’52. I don’t know that though. But I don’t remember evertalking to him about it or people talking about venture capital at all when Iwas in school. It just didn’t—the name didn’t come up. I learned later that theterm had been invented by Elton Mayo, if that’s the correct name, in the earlyforties, middle forties.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So Doriot wasn’t talking to you about risk investment. Johnson: No. He didn’t talk about investments at all, very much. He gave examples ofpeople who’d succeeded, why he thought they succeeded. I remember therewas a woman that invented Pepperidge Farm bread that he had come speak.Margaret Rudkin? [chuckling] It doesn’t make any difference. I can’tremember what I learned yesterday—sometimes I can remember what Ilearned fifty years ago, though! But anyway, she told about getting hercompany going. He used guest speakers some, not every time. She was veryeffective because she had started—that was an entrepreneurial [business].Doriot talked about starting a business though her. My memory doesn’t bringup much talking about entrepreneurship, though, separate from careers, whichis a little bit different subject. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And then as you said, it was the Korean War. Johnson: I got out in ’52 and by then I had met my wife, which is always a diversion.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] You said that she was a Vassar graduate. Johnson: She was a Vassar girl; she got out in ’51. She had spent one year at Stanfordso she met some guys. She met a guy on the track team who gave me hername. [chuckling] So when I went back east I looked her up in New York, andshe was finishing up at Vassar, and so we dated quite a bit during that period.I had postponed my military obligations. I got deferments, to make a longstory short, in order to finish school. Then when school was over I had theduty to and actually looked forward to—I got a direct commission in the airforce as a maintenance officer. In one way I made a mistake. I should have volunteered to be a squadronmaintenance officer and gone to Korea and served. I didn’t have the eyes to bea pilot at that time in my life. I still don’t have the eyes, but I’m a pilotbecause civil pilots don’t have to have the same eyes. So I didn’t sign up forflight training and I would have, I think. I decided I wanted to get a job in theair force that would be something like a business job. It was one of those kindof decisions that efficient young MBAs make. So I worked in different depotsaround the United States, after my training, organizing production lines andbeing kind of an industrial engineer—that’s what they hired. They hired, Ithink, it was sixty graduates from our class that were in the air force at thesame time.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Really! Johnson: They called it Operation Harvard Second Lieutenants. I didn’t go into thesupply side; I went into the maintenance side.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because you were an engineer? Johnson: Oh I don’t know. That’s what I asked for and that’s what I got. Now thereason it wasn’t a mistake—from a life’s point of view it would have beengreat to go on to Korea and been part of a squadron and keep the guys flying,but because I was stateside and began to keep on seeing this wonderful youngwoman. We got married just before I got out of the air force, so I think my lifehad its course, very important part, because I did stay stateside. If I’d gone toKorean for two years, something else would have happened, so my life wouldbe completely different.  But I did stay here. I didn’t fight anybody or ever have a combat job. I did dosome interesting work organizing overhaul lines and modification projects. Ieven did the analysis for a project, and my boss classified it top secret and Ionly had a secret clearance. So I said, “Well, I can’t even read my own report,right?” He said, “All it means is I have to store it in my safe.” I had somewonderful bosses in the air force, guys I worked for. That was my first job,really, out of school. I had these summer jobs where I was doing just everydaywork, and then after that I went to work in the steel plant.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, one question before you leave the— Johnson: I’m racing along!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: —the air force. Is that the origin of your love of planes? Johnson: I really loved airplanes even in high school. I remember our physics teacher,the same guy I was talking about, said, “Somebody wants to give some peoplesome rides, in an airplane, and if you sign up right after class we can takesomeone.” Well, I didn’t make it. I didn’t sign up fast enough, so I remembernot getting that airplane ride, although I’d had some anyway. But I wasinterested in planes all along. Certainly when I got into the air force I realizedthe pilots run the air force. I think it’s still true. They try to make careers foreverybody else, and they do have good careers, but the air force is aboutflying. It was then. Now it’s more missile men, but it was about flying then.So I hitched—I got rides for test flights and went up in airplanes a lotwhenever I could get somebody to take me up. So I became really interestedin airplanes. The answer to you question is yes. My time in the air force gaveme a love of flying and airplanes that I might not have had otherwise.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now the steel mill—how did that happen? Johnson: My time in the air force was good, but I had interviewed in the steel companyat the business school. The vice president of sales came around, a guy namedJack Smith. I said, “I’m very interested in working in the steel industry, but Idon’t want to be a salesman. I want to have a job in the mill.” Because by thenI’d worked in the summers at Kaiser Steel.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, it’s right here. Johnson: No, Kaiser Steel is in southern California. Right here in that sense.The wholething appealed to me, the kind of work, and I knew that while many of myfriends had gone into other downtown-type of jobs—that just wasn’t for me. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: When you say it appealed to you, you mean in the getting down to the nittygritty and actually doing something. Johnson: Yes. On the wall, there’s a picture of an open-hearth shop and a first helperwalking up to a furnace. And on my desk there, there’s the last ingot as Ibecame a foreman and made steel there. The last ingot I made is sitting on mydesk there.Inland Steel had written me a letter while I was in the air force saying, “We’dlove you to come see us when you get out.” They have a little tickler file, so Igot this letter from them about two months before I got out, and a friend of myfather’s was also the production—I think it was general manager of the mill—so that helped too. But whatever. I went to them, interviewed them. I wentdown to Birmingham, interviewed in an airplane overhaul company to get ajob too, and I decided for the long term the steel mill job was what I wanted todo, even though I knew a lot about the other job to start with. So Inland Steel took me in, and I was there within two weeks of the day wewere married. We had a nice little company house near the mill, a very nicerent, and I began to work. In the first couple of years I just did hourly jobs. Itwas a complicated deal because I didn’t join the union, but the union let mework an hourly job because they liked the idea, so I worked alongside of thevarious jobs without taking anybody’s place. It was just a deal they had withthe union.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, and that’s what they like about it? Johnson: To get the young guys trained. If they were going to make foreman theywanted them to be able to do the work. The company wanted it, and I thinkthe men wanted to see that if you’re going to be a foreman someday, althoughthat wasn’t overt. My first superintendent said to me, the main job, he said, “Isto get to know the men. We’ve had other college boys in here.” I didn’t saymuch about Harvard Business School. It was in my record, but not in mydiscussion with them. He said, “The main thing you’ve got to do is learn toknow the men. So I want you to go out there and I want you to work hard andshow them you can do the work, and I want you to take the time to get toknow them.” Best advice you could hand me—just great.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: This was Jack Smith? Johnson: No, Jack Smith was the vice president of sales. Oh no, it’s another world inthe steel—the sales guys. No, my first superintendent was named George Lawton, but it doesn’t make any difference. He’s one of those heart of goldtype of guys who really cared about his people. Anyway, he takes this youngguy in and he puts me on the floor. I worked in the labor gang; I worked in thepit where they pour the steel, and finally they put me up on the floor where thesteel was made. I worked on the different furnaces, and I learned the thirdhelpers do the work around the furnace, second helper takes care of the backof the furnace, and the first helper runs the furnace. And over time I did allthose jobs alongside of these guys and learned them. I think one of the most exciting moments I ever had was when guy namedSmokey Timm, a first helper who was sort of a big, almost typical guy butclearly a leader of the others too, even though he ran his own furnace, he said,“Hey kid, why don’t you have a cup of coffee with me?” I could have huggedhim! [chuckling] It was a moment of acceptance and it meant so much to me. But then after about three years of filling in the summers as a fill-in foremanin the scrap yard. An open shop hearth partly is a scrap yard. There’s a hotmetal mixer where the molten iron comes, there’s the furnaces, there’s thepouring pit, and the auxiliaries that service all that. I trained in all those placesand then finally, the culminating experience, after being a fill-in foreman andactually being a foreman in the scrap yard and in the pit, I became an assistantmelter. The melter had a group of six furnaces, and his job as a foreman job, is towork with the men. I won’t go through all the details of steelmaking, itdoesn’t even exist now in the same way—but you determine when thefurnaces need to be charged, you look at the furnaces, make sure they’re ingood shape, you get them charged up with scrap iron, the scrap iron would bemelted, then you pour in the hot metal which is molten iron. Then you’ddecide when the heat had to be tapped. There was an assistant melter whoworks with the foreman, but when there’s two furnaces at the same time, themelter will often tell [the assistant], “You go tap number 38.” So you take asample ingot and check the chemistry, you do a lot of things; you learn fingerknowledge and you learn the business of making steel in an open-hearthfurnace. So finally, when the melter was going on vacation, when I first did it they putsomebody else in over me, but finally I got to be the melter. I got to be theforeman, and the men were pretty accepting, but I hadn’t spent those twentyyears that they had.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you were unusual and kind of skipping over some of the time andexperience that most people had?  Johnson: Yes. Their plan for me, if there was any, was to be a foreman for a while. Itwas quite an exciting moment for me the first time I walked on the floor incharge of all six furnaces under me, with the men working there with thecranes and the hot metal and the charging cars and all that. That was really thefirst time in my life where somebody said, “Here’s a major job for you to do.”And you can really screw up in that job. Steel can melt its way through thebottom of the furnace. You can make a mistake and have a whole ladleful ofsteel that doesn’t meet the specifications, is really not worth much.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you like that challenge? Johnson: Oh I loved it, Yes. In fact, I really like that work as much as anything I’veever done, partly because the people were so terrific, and partly because likeany young man or woman for the first time somebody saying, “We believe inyou. You can do this.” And I remember when the quality records came in, mynon-applied heats percentage was as good as the old time pros. It wasn’tbetter, by the way, but it was as good as. Those are called non-aps, nonapplied heats. So I just remembered the excitement and thrill of being able todo that work at a level comparable to the old-timers.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now had you gotten to that level just because of experience and observation?Or did somehow your previous education give you a jump? Johnson: Well, the business school didn’t give me a jump, but I think being an engineerdid—and I think they were pushing me along.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So they saw something in you. Johnson: They hired me for that purpose. Oh I don’t know, there’s many reasons forit—among them was the fact that this friend of my dad was the millsuperintendent many levels up, and I wouldn’t be surprised if he said, “If theguy can do it—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Let him. Johnson: But I don’t think he would have ever said, “If he can’t do it,” because it’s toodangerous. It’s physically dangerous. If you don’t take care of yourself andthe people around you, people get hurt. It’s physically dangerous.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How programmed was the danger issue?  Johnson: A lot of emphasis on safety.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: This is a dangerous job you’d better learn how to deal with it. Johnson: No, it’s not that at all. Inland Steel in the fifties had a training [program]—safety was a big part of the training. We had safety meetings with the menevery week and they had big safety records. We had something called “DaysWithout a Lost-Time Accident.” So we were told by the bosses to be tough onguys who violated the safety rules, and the unions, for the most part, backedyou up. So if guys were doing things that were unsafe— There’s a lot of littletricks like, don’t step on a rail, step over a rail, because if you step on a railyour foot could slide out from under you. I remember the most egregious thing that I heard of—I didn’t see it myself—was a guy had gotten down into an ingot mold and gone to sleep. Before youpour the steel out of the ladle, you go in and inspect to see if there’s any junkin there. I didn’t do this personally, but I know it happened. A guy waschecking the molds, the pit foreman was, and he saw a guy asleep because it’swarm. You pour into warm molds. If they hadn’t checked, that guy’d have hadsteel poured on him. These are fables—is it true? I didn’t see it myself, but theguys who told me it, I believe it. But that would be so egregious that I thinkthey gave him time off. The union was pretty good about cooperating on disciplining people forsafety. The company disciplined the supervisors also, and the supervisorswere expected to observe the safety rules. So the answer to your question is,it’s a dangerous environment, but with proper training we had very few losttime accidents. Another thing though, behind the furnace where the steelcomes out, the tapping site which the second helper runs, you get very, veryhot. And you can have heat exhaustion, so two guys are always back theretogether. So when I was back there and I’d learned to dig out a tap hole. Ilearned how to put the charge in there and open up the furnace—and I did thatwith other guys. But I don’t think you ever had people behind the furnace bythemselves, because if you dropped, it’s just too hot. Somebody had to pullyou out of there. But there wasn’t much of that. We took salt pills, or if youfelt heat exhaustion, you just simply sat down if you felt faint.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you think that the powers that be, whoever they were, were looking at youas you moved up through the hierarchy thinking that this is a potential upperlevel executive? Johnson: That was my view of myself. [laughter] I think they were looking for peopleto be superintendents, to run a department. There were three open-hearth departments. I started off in number 2, and it was the big twenty-four furnaceshop, and then I ended up in number 3 and became assistant superintendent.Earlier I became a general foreman, or the auxiliary general foreman, so Iwasn’t the foreman over the melters even though I’d been doing that; I wasthe foreman over the rest of the operation. And after five or six years I workedsteady days. This was all shift work up until—I don’t remember the exactnumber of years, but out of the eight years I spent there probably at least fouror five were shift work. After being a general foreman and going on steady days, then I became anassistant superintendent back at my old shop where I’d come from. They sortof moved you around so you get promoted, but you get promoted somewhereelse. So I put on a coat and tie, and I had to eat lunch with the big bossesdown in the headquarters. That was fun, but the farther I got from thefurnaces, the more I realized that I wasn’t having so much fun. And we gotreally good pay, by the way. So I never did earn less than my—well, I don’tknow, the guys on Wall Street maybe made more. It was a well-paid job. Sowe lived nicely in our company house. All four of our children were bornduring that period.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh really. And how was your wife doing with steel mill life? Johnson: Well, it was new for her because she was from New York. [chuckling] Herfather was a major oil company executive, but he came from the oil fields.From his point of view, I was doing something completely understandable. Idid what he did! He went in the oil fields; I went in the steel mills. He figuredthat’s what young men do. Sometimes people would say to him, “Can’t youget your son-in-law a better job?” He’d say, “He’s doing what he wants todo!” He was a great guy and ran his company well, but I never wanted to gointo the oil business. It just didn’t appeal to me, so I didn’t have that load ofbeing in a father-in-law’s business anyway. But Cathie did well with it. She was pretty busy having babies and taking ofthem. Bill Draper worked for the same company.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, I was wondering when he was going to come into this work. Johnson: We met him very early on. He had started in our business school class, but hewent off in the infantry to Korea and was in the war, literally, for two yearsand then came back to business school, graduated two years later while I wasin the military, so we both ended up at Inland Steel in the summer of 1954.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: By sheer coincidence, right?  Johnson: By coincidence, oh yes, we didn’t even know each other. But we soon becameacquainted, and Cathie and Phyllis became good friends. They lived fiveblocks away, and so we did lots of things together as a family. Their kids weremore or less the same age of ours—Tim [Timothy C.] Draper. I rememberseeing him when he came home from the hospital! So Bill and I became goodfriends. In 1958, his father and two other guys, three other guys really, hadstarted a pioneer venture firm here called Draper, Gaither & Anderson. Billnever worked in the mill—he was a downtown type of guy, he was asalesman. He left his sales job, which he was good at, and joined his father inthis pioneer venture firm. Since they were coming to Palo Alto where I camefrom in the first place, we came out shortly after they did on a vacation trip,and I introduced them to lots of our friends here who still are our friends. Ithink they would have got going nicely without us, but we at least introducedsome people to whom we’re still close. Then about 1961, a lot of interesting stuff happens—I had an option on fortytwo shares of stock at Inland. Not bad, but I noticed that the grandchildren ofthe founders of Inland and the associated company called Ryerson hadsomething like 350,000 shares of stock. So I thought, wait a minute, thissystem isn’t working as well as it could.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] Yes, not exactly democratic. Johnson: No, no—very democratic! They deserved it, their parents founded thecompanies, but I thought it was better to be a founder and a shareholder than itis to be a worker, even though I was getting promoted and was paid well. Ihad nothing much in ownership.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now were stock options just a matter of course in big companies? Johnson: Well, I know Inland gave out stock options to everybody in the management.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And was that fairly commonplace? Johnson: Don’t know.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Among companies? Johnson: Oh I think companies were giving options, young companies. Inland was avery progressive company, a great place to work. Many years later I gave atalk in Chicago to some entrepreneurial conference, and I was saying, because I was in Chicago, what a great place Inland was and how well they took careof the young guys and how well they trained us in safety—I went out and tookmetallurgical courses they paid for. They were very, very progressive, andthey looked after their people. The big bosses came around the mills once in awhile and you shook hands with them and felt like you were a big dealyourself. So after the speech, a young man came up and said, “I’m Phil Block,” whowas the grandson of one of the founders and he had worked at Inland. He said,“Thanks for saying that.” I think he was doing something else by then, and hisdad had been a vice president of—maybe raw materials or something. It was agreat place and Bill Draper would tell you the same. They just took very goodcare of their people. Anyway, in 1961, by then I had heard about the small business investmentcompanies [SBIC], and I’d heard about venture capital just from reading. Iwas able to save on my salary. Living modestly by most standards, we savedup some money, and I made some investments in Cessna aircraft, amongothers. I’d accumulated, not much, but a little bit of capital from savings.During a visit, Bill said, “Why don’t we start a small business investmentcompany?” He wanted to get on his own as well, but was very close to hisfather, a wonderful man, by the way—William Draper, Jr. The father is juniorand Bill is the third [III]. We were out on a normal vacation trip, for me home, even though my parentslived elsewhere. We sat around his kitchen table, like a lot of otherentrepreneurs around here, and cooked up a small business investmentcompany. Small business investment companies then—they still exist—werecompanies where if you put up $150,000, a group of guys or a person, theywould lend you on what they called a debenture basis another 150,[000], sothat would give you a minimum capital of $300,000. You just put that all upin capital. Then they would lend you four times that, at very low-interest rate,long-term loans, if you would restrict the investment you made to smallbusiness, which they defined for you: a certain number of employees, a certainsales level. One of the interesting things—it could not be in businesses againstthe public interest, such as produced or sold alcohol.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: This sounds like an effort by the government to promote small business. Johnson: Exactly what it was. This is my own interpretation of it: the small businessinvestment company was part of the Small Business Administration. Congressdecided, I think in a bipartisan way we don’t see much of these days[chuckling], that too much business activity was in big companies only, andthat we needed to have a more entrepreneurial society. A really wise decision. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Who was behind that? Johnson: Well, I don’t know exactly. I think it came up during the Eisenhoweradministration, but you know, I don’t know the time, but I know the SmallBusiness Investment Act of ’58 was passed.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So it was very young when you were thinking about it. Johnson: Very young, but we heard about—the SBIC program was one. So I scraped upmy savings and borrowed some from my father-in-law who was very goodabout helping me in what was a big way then! And then Bill got his $75,000together some way.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: He had been worker at Draper, Gaither— Johnson: He had been working at Draper, Gaither from ’58 until ’61 when thishappened.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And so he’d made a little bit of money by then? Johnson: He can tell you that. He saved up something, obviously! I borrowed $50,[000]and had saved up $25,[000]. I remember that much. I don’t know what Billdid. It’s his business. But we needed to get a license. My congressman from Indiana was called Charles [A.] Halleck, who was theminority leader of the house. So this amazed me, but I called up his office andI took a few days off, went back to Washington, and got an appointment withmy representative just by a phone call! It was just a constituent calling.Nobody called for me or nobody paved the way. So I went in his office and hesaid, “I’m glad to meet you.” He was my congressman, but he was alsominority [leader]. He had a pretty fancy office. Then he started picking up thephone—a great showman calling all these big-name guys, “What’s happeningwith the SBIC [Small Business Investment Corporation] bill? When are wegoing to get the appropriations.” And all that stuff. It was a matter of gettingappropriations. I had nothing to do with what happened, but I did find out thatthe appropriation bill was on the way. I met with some SBA [Small BusinessAssociation] people. You had to get them to approve you as people who wererunning this, so they approved Bill and me.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that just a matter of looking if you had enough money?  20 Johnson: No it wasn’t. They checked you out. I presume they checked again—criminalbackground, education. They licensed a lot of people. I don’t remember thenumber that started—let’s say 150 SBICs were licensed over a few years’time. So that was ’61, so by ’62 we got our license. So with a heavy heart Ileft my job in the mills, and left these guys who’d brought me up frombasically nowhere in terms of knowing anything. Bill and I started in 1962.We were delayed slightly because of the birth of our final child on August 6,1962, so after that we moved on out here. I was familiar with the area anyway,so we started our SBIC September of 1962.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, before you launch into that, give us a picture of the landscape in whatwe now call venture capital. And actually, we should stop and change thetape.[End Audio File 1]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What was going on in what we now call venture capital when you werebeginning what became Draper and Johnson? Johnson: Yes, sure. There’s one thing I meant to mention specifically about myborrowing that $50,000, because it was so moving. I hope I can tell withoutbreaking up. My father-in-law, whose name was Eugene Holman, who was avery prominent oil executive in what was called Standard Oil of New Jersey,which is called Exxon now, Exxon Mobil, became fatally ill. [overcome byemotion]. Oh, this is tough [chuckling]. I went to see him and just wish himwell, and he said, “Don’t forget. I’m lending you $50,000.” This is a man onhis death bed. [expels breath] I’m getting too old, I guess, for this! Well, Ithought that was it. But then after he died, his assistant contacted me and said,“Mr. Holman’s left this check.” And it was—you know, it was just great.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, I can see why it has emotion around it. Johnson: Very emotional. But the fact is I’ve been exposed to some great people, menand women in my life, and you can see the standards people have sometimes.[voice breaking] Let’s take a little break, okay?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All right.  Johnson: Well, first of all, there were very few venture firms when Bill and I got startedin ’62. We had an informal group that met monthly for dinner. There weretwelve of us, and it was called the Western Association of Small BusinessInvestment Companies, which itself was the forerunner of the WesternAssociation of Venture Capitalists. So for several months, probably a year ormore, there were twelve—all guys, I might add, who had SBICs. One womancame to those meetings, she was an officer in the company. About half ofthem were doing real estate and other things that weren’t really—it’s certainlyventure and it’s certainly capital, but it’s not what we think of technology andbiotech and technically-oriented venture capital. The characteristics of the business landscape—first of all, let me talk aboutthe geographical landscape. These were still individual towns. When I was akid, Palo Alto was a town. Mayfield, now called California Avenue, was aseparate town. They were pretty much connected together. Mayfield actuallybecame part of Palo Alto in 1938 or so, but Mountain View was separate,Sunnyvale was separate. Menlo Park was next door, but then Atherton was allbig estates. It was a lot of green around here and not so many houses andalmost no significant business structures other than the Hendy Iron Works andsome industrial-type stuff. But it was orchards—orchards all over the place. Iremember how exciting it was as a kid to go up in the springtime and ride ourbicycles up in the hills and look out at the Santa Clara Valley. It was white—the prune and apricot trees. Even high school kids went up to look at it. Orbefore even high school. So the geography in the early sixties had changed alot from what I’m telling you about as a kid, but it was still distinct towns, notjust one megalopolis or megopolis, whatever the word is. It runs pretty muchfrom San Francisco to San Jose now. But as far as the venture business goes, the SBICs were, as I say, I’m prettysure twelve is the approximate number if not the exact—that was the numberof people who came to these dinners. It was characterized by the fact that youcould get in any deal by calling. If you heard about a deal, you could callanybody up, and they’d let you in if you wanted to or were interested. Or ifyou were doing a deal, you typically asked another firm or two to participatewith you—not always, but if someone had called. It was not as competitive oras difficult to get into deals that you heard about but weren’t ones youoriginated. Bill and I believed in being cooperative and working hard on thethings, so if we were in somebody else’s deal we did more than our share ofthe work. I can’t tell you the number of deals we did, but we put up our money, our$150,[000]. We borrowed the $150,[000] from the debenture basis and thenwe were limited to $60,000 per investment, which was one fifth of $300,000,which was our capital, half of which was provided by the government itself ona different basis. So first of all, the landscape was very little money lookingfor very few deals—just the opposite of what some people say it is now. But Draper, Gaither & Anderson was in full-fledge running. It was a partnership instructure a lot like a modern venture partnership, with limited partners.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, now was that a new idea? The limited partnership? Johnson: They started in ’58. The idea of a limited partnership, of course, was not new.It’s just a form of business that evolved a long time ago. But for doinginvestment firms as limited partnerships, I doubt it was new. I thinkinvestment firms and non-venture firms were structured that way back East,I’m sure, for a long time before that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: We talked at the beginning about the well-to-do families, the Rockefellers andthe Whitneys. Has venture capital or whatever you’re calling this industrynow on the East Coast evolved so that their big companies may have a venturecapital branch? Johnson: No. That’s something lately. In the West it was a few SBICs and one publicSBIC based in San Diego which was a pretty good size and then Draper,Gaither & Anderson, which was a private limited partner structure with abunch of general partners and a bunch of associates, which was a trainingground for many modern players, including Pete Bancroft, I might add. Thenback East you had AR&D [American Research and Development]. The dealthat was going in Boston then, you had the Rockefeller family and associatesin New York, and the Whitneys, and then there’s a company called BessemerSecurities—the capital came from the development of the Bessemer Furnace,which was a predecessor of the open-hearth furnace that I worked on, and thatfamily’s called Phipps. They had the Bessemer Securities, still in existence,which ran some of their family assets and put a lot of that into venture capital.And there were other families I can’t name, but I know there were.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: The banks didn’t have a venture capital branch? Johnson: Banks, no—they got going pretty soon. I’d have to look at my chart to findout and tell you when. The Bank of America, then a different bird than it isnow, local-oriented company of the Gianninis started a venture capital firm. Idon’t think it was an SBIC. Then Hale Brothers, Prentiss Hale, started an earlyfirm called Western Business Assistance which was an SBIC. But it wasn’tHale Brothers, a branch of the retailing group. The Hale family hired a veryextraordinary man called H.D. Thoreau, [Jr.] to run that for them. And he didwell with it, and some others. I don’t remember the amount of capital inDraper, Gaither & Anderson, but it started off with about $5 million. So it[million] at that point.  So there were deals around. Bill and I tried to figure out where things weregoing, and so we thought of lasers as one area that something might be going.We thought of different technologies, but mostly we just sort of sniffedaround. One thing we did that was almost amusing—there were two streets inPalo Alto called Commercial and Industrial. Entrepreneurs were beginning tostart companies on their own, and so we used to go down Commercial. We didone time, literally, go down there in our car and walk along, knock on thedoors and say, “Want any money today?” kind of thing. It was reallyinteresting because people would almost never wouldn’t ask you in. It wasn’tlike knocking on a home asking if you want to buy any brushes—they wereinterested in talking about it even if they didn’t want any money. We didn’tquite say it in those terms. We said, “We’re venture capitalists and we’veheard about your company.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you were calling yourselves venture capitalists? Johnson: Yes, we did—we called it Draper and Johnson Investment Company. I wasthe vice president, Bill was the president, and we set up our office at 780Welch Road—that’s over by the Stanford Hospital. We just started upsometime in September of ’62, opened our office, and we just had to finddeals. We talked to people. I think the first thing we did was called sitronic,which is two companies, actually, that did some electronic packaging andsomething called checkwares weighers. When you weigh packaged goods,you have to run them across a scale to see if they’re underweight or not. JoeJulie was the entrepreneur and so we did that deal.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, and this was just by nosing around? Johnson: Nosing around. Bill had been here since 1958, so he knew people. I didn’tknow anything other than I fancied myself as somebody who knewtechnology and understood physics and that sort of stuff.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It sounds to me as though you had a pretty good start. Johnson: Well, Bill was Mr. Outside. He’s always been good at that, and I was Mr.Inside. I don’t want to imply that I did more analysis than Bill did. I remembergoing on a PSA flight to L.A. for something or other. So Bill and I weresitting there together, and the stewardesses are all over Bill, and I could hardlyget my lunch! [laughter] Bill’s really good at that. I don’t mean at flirting withthe girls, I just meant he’s a very externally-oriented guy and very good at it, Imight add. Bill goes in a room, and by the time a half hour’s up, he knowseverybody in the room. I’m still talking to somebody in the corner. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you know that about him? Johnson: Well, I knew he was outward-directed. I knew, as a salesman he’s not exactlyshy. But I knew that, yes, and it was very helpful for us because he opened alot of doors and knew people. He was careful about not overusing his Draper,Gaither contacts, but we did some deals. I don’t remember if we did a dealwith them or not. We did several deals. Another one was Behavioral ResearchLaboratories, which was a programmed learning company which would havebeen computerized ten years later. We did a deal that mixed water at a dam. Ifthey want to get the right temperature of the water coming out they have to—The water higher is hotter and the water lower is colder, so we had a productto mix the water to get a certain temperature. It was a control system. I can’tname them all, but there were several deals.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: In each of these cases, were you pulling upon this group of SBIC executivesto chip in to the deals? Johnson: No. Not at all. It wasn’t like modern-day angels where they have a dinner andeverybody decides to throw in a few bucks and back it. No, we didn’t reallytalk about deals so much. We’d have dinner and we’d talk about the business,where it was going, dealing with the government. The SBA’s pretty good, butthere were a lot of forms and bureaucracy that you had to deal with, and wetalked about that. But we did talk about deals. Somebody would say they’redoing this, they’re doing that. We’d talk about where things were going. Halfof them weren’t even interested in technology deals anyway. They wereinterested in real estate and that sort of stuff. So the only reason I mentionedthe twelve is, I think that probably represented most of or a lot of the venturecapitalists that were SBICs. There were others doing it, but the only one Ireally know of, other than individuals, some of which are shown on our chartwere—Ed Heller was an individual doing it at the time—was Draper, Gaither& Anderson.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was there the term angels at that time? Johnson: No. The word wasn’t used. Because we were all small, we were doing brandnew startups a lot of the time, but not always. We did startups and we diddeals that were already underway. The idea of angels only took place muchlater, when individuals were backing companies to get them going. Probablynot fair, but I always think of angels as putting money in and seeing whathappens. I’m sure I could be criticized for saying that. Venture capitalistsunderstand their job is to put money in the company and work with thecompany. So I always think of it as capital, consulting, and commitment,because entrepreneurs are very driven men and women, and they want someone who understands the competitive and athletic zeal that they have.That’s a lot of the success. It isn’t only thinking your way through things anddoing them right. You don’t have to be an athlete, of course, you just have tohave athletic attitudes about winning. This is as important to manyentrepreneurs as making money. That’s not always true, because it comes withit. Without the money they wouldn’t do it, but without the competitive zealthey wouldn’t make it. So it’s kind of a combination.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: This idea of working with a company, working with the entrepreneur to builda company. Was that a new concept? It’s not just a matter of putting yourmoney in and seeing what happens. Johnson: It wasn’t really, because all I really know is a lot of it has to do historicallywith the book The Visible Hand. You can’t start a steel mill small, you can’tstart an oil company small. People did make deals, people did invest, andpeople did guide companies. But I don’t know much about the twenties andthirties—the thirties, not much was going on anyway, people were trying tofeed their kids. But the twenties was boom times and a number of companieswere started. I think they probably had people rather than institutions thatbacked companies. There always were investment banks that were raising money for companies,but they were mostly not, I don’t think, for new companies. But I know in theformation of U.S. Steel, they brought together Carnegie Steel, and I think theHenry Frick Coke Works—the Frick Companies, to form U.S. Steel. So thosewere two existing companies that were brought together along with capitalfrom J.P. Morgan. That’s big-time stuff, though, that’s not entrepreneurialcapital. But it was what was going on in those eras, and I’m sure without evenchecking it out there were dozens, many hundreds of small firms started.There are some still in existence that started back in the twenties, backed byflush times and individual backers who backed entrepreneurs and they builtcompanies. But the idea of angels—I’d never even heard of angels ‘til about twenty yearsago. And that’s recent times.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But that is an interesting distinction, isn’t it? Both are financing, in manycases, startup companies. But a venture capitalist—and you should be sayingthis, not me—has a sustained role with the company that is being financed;that it’s just not a matter of putting money in and letting it go. Johnson: Well, I’d better be careful that it isn’t just a venture capital conceit. Someangels are organized into groups. I don’t know if they call the lead one anarchangel or not, but they have leaders of these groups, and I think they follow through. I think most angels are successful, operating businessmen who’vemade quite a bit of money, or women, and they put money into youngcompanies. I can’t imagine they just leave them alone. We’ve got five guyshere [at Asset Management Company] plus me, all of whom work hard on thecompanies we invest in. We’re not unusual, we’re usual, actually. We do,heavily, startups or very young companies. Other firms that are bigger, theytend to do much later stage because they’ve got to put more money to work.So we’re not worried about getting money to work, we’re about finding thingsappropriate for our size. But anyway, getting back to your original question, the landscape was veryuncompetitive, very few people. In some ways, from the entrepreneur’s pointof view, it wasn’t competitive. They were dealing with a cartel, not a spokencartel or even a written cartel, but just that they didn’t have any way to goshopping deals, because it was one monolithic—not quite monolithic—groupof investors that they were dealing with. But we did talk to each other a lot and share deals and of course bargaintogether on things.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So the companies that you mentioned a few minutes back had several venturecapitalists backing them? Johnson: No. The Illumitronics was one we did by ourselves, although my own dad puta little bit and Bill’s dad put a little bit in alongside, so it was only us.Behavioral Research Laboratories was two or three investors. I don’tremember who. I think the others were individuals, by the way, not firms.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh really. Johnson: Yes. The deal that we did with the balancing the water, which didn’t reallysucceed, was a couple three firms. So it was a mix. It was the very first year. Ithink January 2, 1963 was when we closed our first deal, having gone inbusiness in September. And then on May 2, ’63, I remember that because itwas my birthday, we closed the Behavioral Research Labs, and that was oursecond deal. So we were not racing out with money. We did a deal in threemonths and then five months later we did another deal. And then in 1963 weprobably did one or two more. Then—I could look them up, but I can’t—wedid about six or seven.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What was your state of mind?  Johnson: Well, my state of mind was this is fun but I’d rather be a player than a coach.So I began to realize that what I really wanted to do, even though I likedworking with Bill and he’s an excellent guy to be a partner with—I wanted tobuy a company and run it myself. So that was in the back of my mindalthough I liked working with these guys and helping them. I figured, gee, ifI’m going to help them this much, I might as well run one! So in 1965, SutterHill offered us a very good price for our portfolio. I thought, here’s mychance, because Bill could go over and be the major—along with Paul [M.]Wythes—the major figure in Sutter Hill, which was a real estate company thatwas getting into venture capital at that point. They wanted our portfolio togive them a good start, although I think they had an SBIC also, by the way.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And so Paul Wythes was there? Johnson: Paul Wythes was already there. We have a lot of fun kidding Paul about whofounded Sutter Hill. After we sold our portfolio to them, then Bill joinedSutter Hill. He and Paul ran Sutter Hill, and they did a great job as we allknow now. I had a few hundred thousand bucks for the first time in my life, and I wastrying to find the company to buy. And I looked around a bit. I ran into a littlebiotech instrumentation company up in Berkeley and I did that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What was it called? Johnson: Chromatronix. And it had valves and fittings to use in chemistry andbiochemistry.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So this is mid-sixties that you’re doing that? Johnson: It is exactly ’65. And so one thing that happened that turned out to beimportant later, because I was here and I had been a student in good standingwhen I left Stanford, I was able—you can enroll in courses later. I didn’tknow anything about molecular biology, so I took a course in molecularbiology in 1964, or something, and met some really good scientists—it wasn’tmeeting them personally. But I heard about DNA and making proteins fromthe DNA and RNA process, and it opened my eyes to the fact that that couldbe a very important area.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: As early as the mid-sixties?  Johnson: That was 1964 I took that course.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That’s before recombinant DNA. Recombinant DNA doesn’t come alonguntil ’72-’73. Johnson: Could I have taken that course after? I thought I took it when Bill and I weretogether. I’ll look it up. The first course I took over at Stanford was calledpartial differential equations—that interested me because I never did get itright in school—never did get it right, actually! Then I took a course incomputers, the beginning computer course. Maybe that was when I was withBill.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I bet. Johnson: Yes, and then a little later I went back and took the molecular biology course.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: From my knowledge of the history, that makes more sense. Johnson: I took three courses there, because neither this computer [science] nor thattype of genetics were in school when I was there. When did Watson and Crickpublish?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: 1953. but that was the discovery of the structure of DNA. How to geneticallyengineer, how to manipulate DNA, came in the early ‘70s. Johnson: Well, then I think that’s too late, because Amgen was founded in 1980 andGenentech had to have been founded about 1975 or 6.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Seventy-six. Johnson: Yes. I think the ability to have a course about the structure of DNA occurredbefore that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh it could have. The science of DNA— Johnson: —they didn’t talk about how you’d manipulate it. I think they just talkedabout the Watson-Crick discoveries, and [Paul] Berg and [Arthur] Kornbergand [David] Korn came to our class and talked. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh did they really! Johnson: And Hogness talked. I think they talked about what you might do, but it sureopened my eyes. I remember working in the lab there, and we would findstrains of bacteria that could thrive in tryptophan. But the idea that you takeorganisms which were not human and insert genes into them—we didn’t do it,but the idea you could do it was certainly part of that course. So I can find outquickly when that was, but I’m going to take a guess it was 1964.After we sold out to Sutter Hill and Bill went there, then I set up an office inmy home and worked there. Well, that’s for a later meeting, I think. But Ithink that course in computers probably opened my eyes to lots of things,especially that one. I wouldn’t have gotten involved in Amgen, I don’t think,which was very important to me without that and that was 1980. I rememberthat date very well.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What got you interested in taking the molecular biology course was thisinvestment in the Chromatronix? Johnson: No, no. I think I did Chromatronix after that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Then, what moved you? Johnson: The fact that I had empty spots in my education.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. Johnson: Computers didn’t exist when I was in school. Partial differential equationsdid, but that was a separate issue. And then, molecular biology did not exist,but I was aware of it. I read the magazines and popular press. Sometimes Iread something like Science or something like that. I’m sure what themotivation was—there are things going on I don’t know about, and I want toknow about computers, and I want to know about modern biology.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Ultimately with the idea of maybe this is going to lead to a new area ofinvestment? Johnson: Yes, that’s true, but I’ve always had this, maybe not healthy, conflict betweenwhat interests me just for the hell of it, and what might lead to business. Ithink it’s been basically good, because I think the course in molecular  30biology—I knew in general, without being specific about it, that taking thatcourse would fill me in, fill a big gap in my knowledge that I didn’t have. I’msure in the back of my mind I was thinking, well, maybe this’ll lead tosomething someday, or maybe it’s just something exciting going on I need toknow about. And the same thing was true of the computer course. That wasmuch more obviously of commercial use.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: The fact that molecular biology would become a commercial gold mine was inthe future. Johnson: Yes, that’s right. I remember talking to those guys that gave the course aboutwhen can this done? When could this possibly be done for human beings?They said, “A long way off.” I remember that part, and I remember a guytalking at one of these local service clubs speaking to it. I happened to go to it.I asked him that question, and he said, “This is really theoretical stuff, butsome day we’ll be inserting genes into non-human organisms to make humanproteins.” But he said, “Some day.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that course team taught by the Department of Biochemistry? Johnson: No, it was taught by a guy named Dow [O.] Woodward, who was a youngbiology professor and, by that time, Don[ald] Kennedy, who much laterbecame president [of Stanford], who was a biology professor and was a friendof mine. So we were talking about these issues as well. But Dow Woodwardinvited these leading guys on the front end of the research to speak in hisclass. But it was just fantastic for the undergraduates, which was most of thecourse, plus an old undergraduate taking an undergraduate course. They usedto call it graduate at large, which I thought was a rather funny title.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, you were in one of the hotbeds of molecular biology at the time. Johnson: I didn’t know it, though! [laughter] But without that course, I might have gotinvolved anyway. Probably in another interview we’ll talk about BrookByers’s time with me and how that worked out. I remember talking to Brookearly on in 1972 when he first came with me, “We’ve got to stay alert to this.This is going to be some big deal.” His roommate at that time was BobSwanson.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I know that! Johnson: [chuckling] Why we didn’t get involved—that’s a little later than what we’retalking about right now unless you want to leap to that. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, Genentech was founded in1976. And we’re still talking about the midsixties. Johnson: Mid-sixties. So one thing in that decade—people began to wake up to venturecapital. There were some successful things in the late-sixties—this dates backto my father-in-law. He had died by then, but I said to my mother-in-law, I’dlike to meet Laurance Rockefeller. I don’t do much of this in my life, but Isure did that time. She said, “Well, I’ll give him a call.” So the next time I wasin New York, I forget why, maybe just a family visit, Laurance Rockefellerwas nice enough to see me. It was about 4:30, and I said, “Well, gee, I reallyappreciate all the time you’ve given me.” He was telling about how theirfamily got going in venture capital and the deals they’d done. They had anoffice then called the Rockefeller Family and Associates. I said, “Well, thank you very much.” He said, “Well, what’s your hurry?”[chuckling] I said, “Well, I think this half hour is a lot of your time.” He said,“I’d like [you] to meet some of our people.” So he took me and introduced meto Ted [H.] McCourtney and Peter [O.] Crisp and some other guys, and a guynamed Charlie [Charles B.] Smith. The important thing was I met these guys there, and so I did some deals withthem after that. The first one was called Coherent Radiation then. It was alaser company, which I was sort of alert to from having—I didn’t take acourse in it, but I did learn some things about it back in the early sixties. Thenthere’s another deal we did called BioSurface Technolog[ies], whichdeveloped ways of growing patches of your own skin, patches of yourcartilage. We sold that to Genzyme and the products are on the market now.So that was two Rockefeller-related deals that I did do.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And that was through Draper and Johnson? Johnson: No, that was after Draper and Johnson. Draper and Johnson was sold and wepaid off our government debt and we had some money left over. I forget, twoor three hundred thousand bucks that I had then, never having had any capital,that I was going to buy a company [with]. It was like those ads for whiskey,you took one sip and then you took another sip and pretty soon you know. ButI got going on my own, didn’t have anybody working [for me]. I didn’t hireBrook [Byers] until 1972, so this whole period from ’65 to ’72 I was just onmy own. We moved to Palo Alto in ’68 from Atherton where we’d been living, and Iset up an office and a woman came in every morning who was my assistantand helped me do things, set up a card table, actually. I didn’t see a company Ireally wanted to buy, but I did see deals, because I was in the swim by then. People were calling me, and Hale Brothers Associates, that I told you aboutearlier, they were looking at Chromatronix, so we did that together. That wasa very early company—later on invented some of the first manual analysis ofprotein—sequenators they’re called. They take proteins and break them downto the amino acids, and later on had a way of assembling proteins, and in alaborious inefficient way assembling nucleic acids.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That early! Johnson: That early—in the mid-late sixties. Another thing, we had a young assistantprofessor at Caltech who was our advisor called Lee Hood. [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh yes. [chuckling] Johnson: But later on Mike [Michael W.] Hunkapiller, then later on, much later we dida deal called Applied Biosystems. I did it in our family partnership which weformed a little bit after that. So that’s how I got involved with Lee. AppliedBiosystems didn’t take the technology from Chromatronix, but Chromatronixpioneered, in a very manual early way of tacking nucleic acids together toform short genes—it was just amazing.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, and that was the ultimate goal? To create artificial genes? Johnson: The ultimate goal of that company was to make equipment to be used in—When I invested in it, and a guy named Dick Gundelfinger— It wasinteresting being in Berkeley in the early seventies and late sixties, because Iwent into the lab one time and everybody was wearing conical peasant-typehats and they were flying the American flag upside down. I couldn’t stand it. Itook the flag down, I put it right side up. And they said, “You’re a fascist.” Isaid, “No. As long as I’m chairman of the board, we’re not flying theAmerican flag upside down.” It was an anti-Vietnam [protest]. I said, “Youcan wear any damn hats you want to and you can say what you want, butwe’re not going to—.” They thought of me as this incredible right winger.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You’ve got to fly the flag right. Johnson: You’re not going to disgrace our flag. It was a symbol of distress. I said,“You’re not in distress.” They said, “But the country is.” It was a greatBerkeley argument is what it was. Gundelfinger had a pretty good kid, ascientist, who was leading that little demonstration. I was in a big argumentwith the president, and I just said, “I can’t stand it. I’m not going to have it.” Ididn’t have the power to do much about it really except make noise. But that was a distraction. That was one day, one visit. But basically they were tryingto make what they called low dead-volume valves and then pulseless pumps.And they made chromatography systems. That was [what] the company’sbusiness was. This was just something that Dick did using Lee Hood’s advice,I think. I don’t think they really sold them. It wasn’t the business. And thenSpectra-Physics bought it from us. They wanted to get in that business, andthey had been our rival in the laser business from Coherent, so I knew them.They bought the company and didn’t do much with it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Does Moshe Alafi figure in any of this? Johnson: Yes, Moshe became a good friend. He was part of Physics International whichdeveloped the physics that brought the halves of the A-bomb together. I metsome of his colleagues in that, and we did a couple of investments together.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Wasn’t he was operating kind of the way you were? Johnson: He did, yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: As a pretty independent agent. Johnson: Yes, in those days and still, really, I’m different from other venture funds, youknow. We don’t have a lot of outside investors.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh is that so? Johnson: We’re just my wife and my kids and Asset Management Partners. Then weformed a new fund in ’04, and several of our families that knew us asked ifthey could be involved. Of course, we wanted to get a little more capital so wedid that, and one Indian tribe. This is very modern history. One Indian tribecame in, suggested by some Asian Indian friends. It’s a very interesting tribeback in Colorado called the South Utes. But that’s ’04, that’s modern.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, we haven’t gotten there yet. Johnson: We haven’t got there yet.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But just to recapitulate, essentially it’s always been family money?  Johnson: Yes. I’ll go through that history. It’s pretty easy. I didn’t have any money.Iborrowed money from my father-in-law who made it available on his deathbed, basically, after having promised it. I never had enough capital to talkabout doing anything on my own. But I forget the number, let’s say$350,[000], something along in there, after we sold our portfolio and then paidoff our debts to the government. Then I took a trip to South America. In 1965 Cathie and I went and lookedaround. Her grandparents came from Argentina, so we went down and visitedthe distant cousins, second cousins of hers. They were Americans, but theyhad moved down there after the Civil War. Her grandfather came back, but alot of them stayed down there. So we had a visit with them, and we went toVenezuela and Chile and Brazil, had a good visit. But anyway, I was goneabout two months. I had bought some—I forget what stocks I bought, I think it was some localcompany that did very well while I was gone, so I had another 100,000 bucksbeyond what I started with, so that helped too. So then—then I began lookingfor a company to buy and that’s when I found Chromatronix and Coherent andthat’s when I went to see Laurance Rockefeller. I don’t think I’d have doneCoherent—Chromatronix I would have done without, but I think thatconnection through Mrs. Holman got me involved with their office and we didtwo or three deals together. Two I can name for sure. But basically I was on my own and invested that capital. I don’t remember theexact time, but about 1970 I formed a family SBIC, another one, called AssetManagement Capital Company. We liquidated that eventually, paid off thegovernment and formed Asset Management Partners, back about, oh whenBrook was there, actually, between ’72 and ’77. I’m rambling along now, but I think that key area I established myself on myown occurred starting in 1965, having had a little capital for the first time inmy life. It was a good feeling, actually. And so I did deals, and I had prettygood results from them, got very interested in biotechnology. Chromatronixwas the first of the biotech-oriented deals. And then Bill [William K.] Bowes,[Jr.]—do you want to go on with that now?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: No, let’s not start on Amgen yet. Johnson: Okay. That’s a long story.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, let’s save that for next time. Have you said enough about Moshe?  Johnson: Oh no. So I got to know Moshe very well. I’m trying to think of the deals wedid together, but I’m pretty sure Chromatronix—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, he was a principal in Cetus. Johnson: In Cetus, but I did not do Cetus.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you have a chance to do Cetus? Johnson: No. I didn’t hear about it. I think Bill Bowes did though.And I think Mosheand I talked more than we did, but I’m practically sure he was part ofChromatronix. I knew him well, saw him a lot. He has a fine son called Chris,who’s a good guy.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, he has gone into venture capital, too. Johnson: Yes, I know he has. We talked a lot about physics; we talked about lots ofstuff. We were always friendly, and I admire and like Moshe. He was born inIraq, by the way. The answer is I know him well and we did a deal or twotogether and Chromatronix was one, but I don’t remember the other one. He’sa good man; he’s got good judgment about science, and he works hard.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why don’t we stop with your assessment of what the SBIC program meant toventure capital, or what was to come. Johnson: Well, first of all, it was a good concept. It was a result of good, bipartisanwork in Congress. People thinking, for once, what’s good for the country?What do we need? And people agreed that we needed some kind of a systemso people could start their own businesses, and I could see why that wouldappeal to both sides of the House. If we just kept on like we were going, therewould be nothing but big companies, and people working in big companies,not what the Congress, speaking for all of us, wanted. The first group of SBICs, they didn’t really have the rules right, and there wasquite a bit of self-serving. There were people lending money to their in-lawsand all that kind of stuff, and so they cleaned up. I will say this, the SBA is apretty good outfit. They’re run pretty well, and it was then, and as far as Iknow it’s run pretty well now. So it’s not one of those government agenciesyou throw up your hands and say, “Good God.” But once they cleaned it up,then they were more strict about who was getting licenses. Bill and I were inthe very first group with the Small Business Investment Act of ’58 that created SBICs. We formed it in ’61 and then actually started business in ’62,so we weren’t in the first generation. I don’t remember whether they hadcleaned it up by then or not, but we qualified and got our license. Looking back on it, it resulted in two major things. The first one was it createdan environment and a system so that people thought that having anentrepreneurial society was a good thing. This is a very general topic, but theidea that our nation wanted entrepreneurs, our nation wanted people to be ableto start businesses and grow them, and it’s very hard to do that with bootstrapsonly, especially in technology. The second thing that happened was anaccident. It created a cadre of people, of which Bill Draper and I are twomembers, who entered the venture capital business that way, and later on wentinto the present-day venture capital business which is entirely private. But ofthe two—they’re both important, because the venture capital business is animportant part of the entrepreneurial system. Without venture capital, somecompanies would get going, but many would not. And many would not beable to grow because they wouldn’t get growth capital. So I would say that you couldn’t argue that the SBIC program was not asuccess. It was a success because much of the flavor of America now isentrepreneurship, is about people starting companies, trying to make money,and trying to have that kind of success that comes with people who want to beindependent and build their own lives. It’s not just money—a lot of it’smoney—you couldn’t take the money out of it, but you couldn’t take the spiritout of it either. So that’s what the SBIC program gave us, and the taxpayers,as far as I know, it didn’t cost much. They got their money back. The loansthat were lent—we borrowed money from the government in those days. Lateron they changed it to guaranteeing bank loans. Now the government— I don’teven understand it now—but it gets part of the profits. The program is stillgoing, but one or two people can’t do it now. You’ve got to have a group, Ithink it is, to do it. And I haven’t really checked it out. Bill Draper kept one inexistence for a long time. I don’t know if he still has it or not, but as far as theoriginal SBIC, those two things are what made it successful and it did work.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: A good place to stop, I think, for today.  Johnson: You just ask me a question. You let me know.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, I will ask you a question. Well, last time, Mr. Johnson— Johnson: Won’t you call me Pitch?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, all right. I wanted to be formal on tape. [chuckling] Johnson: No, no. Be normal. Mr. Johnson is my father, actually.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All right, Pitch. We went through your early history, and you introducedBrook Byers, but we didn’t get much further than that. So maybe you couldpick up on that part of the history. Johnson: Sure. Well, I can’t give you the exact year I met Brook, but it was about 1971.I had been operating by myself. I worked in my own house, and my assistant,a woman, came in every day and set up a card table and answered the phoneand took care of things. The workload got pretty heavy, and I wanted to havean assistant, somebody to work with me. I was a private investor; I had a littlefamily partnership, and I did things just privately, although I had a familySBIC as well, which gave some leverage. What I can’t remember is who first mentioned Brook to me. He had workedfor one of our portfolio companies. I’m sure it was Allen [D.] Calvin who wasrunning that company called Behavioral Research Laboratories. But Brookhad moved on to another job at that point, but Allen said that I should talk toBrook, it would be good. Brook, as I learned later, was a Georgia Techengineer and a Stanford MBA, and so had some breadth of education that Iliked. So we met a couple of times and, after talking to a couple of referencesthat knew him, I decided he would be very good at our business. What a gooddecision that was! [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right! Were you calling yourself a venture capitalist at that point? Johnson: That’s right. I was calling myself a venture capitalist ever since 1962 whenBill Draper and I started Draper and Johnson Investment Company, which wehave covered. And then, in 1965 we sold our portfolio to Sutter Hill. Bill went with Sutter Hill, and then I went on my own as an individual and with afamily SBIC and a family partnership from ’65 on. I hired Brook in 1972. Hecame to work, we bought the house next door where we could work, so he hadhis own office. We worked together, and we looked at a lot of deals. Iremember the first one that Brook did, I would say, most of the work on or alot of the work on, was called Tandem Computers. Tom Perkins, whom I’dknown long before that, had founded it within Kleiner & Perkins, and hewanted an outside investor to validate the deal to other investors. So Brookchecked it out, went down and visited with Jim Treybig and did a fine job, andso we did invest in it and it worked out very nicely. It is, incidentally, how hemet Tom Perkins.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I looked at the videotape with all of you at the panel at the Computer HistoryMuseum. Johnson: Yes, about five year ago.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I remember Tom Perkins saying that first fund, which of course supportedTandem and Genentech and others, which did not do as well, was the largestfund in the world at that point. Johnson: At $6 million?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: At $8 million. Johnson: Eight million, Yes. It was. Well, Tom had to engage an investment banker toraise the money, actually, but it did well. Although I went on the board ofTandem, and I certainly participated in the check on them, Brook did a finejob of chasing down all the alleys and figuring out about the people, lookingat the marketplace, evaluating the technology.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Had you shown him how to do that? Johnson: Well, yes, I showed him some things. On one hand, he denies thisnowadays—I sort of threw him in the pool and let him swim. He could swim.On the other hand, he’d come back, we’d talk over—I think by questions andby asking him what things he’d found out. It wasn’t like, do this with yourright hand, do this with your left hand. But we need to know these things. AndI think there was some of that. He gives me a lot of credit nowadays for thoseyears of being his mentor. As a matter of fact, in just the last few weeks wedid an interview and a series of photographs for a magazine whose name Idon’t know—it was a book about mentoring. He did me the great compliment of naming me his mentor, so we had a bunch of pictures. It’s one of thosethings where they take a hundred pictures, they’ll use one.But anyway, I didn’t do active mentoring, like sitting him down and lecturinghim sort of thing. We worked together, I asked the questions, and in the endhe watched the process, in my case, of making the decision about investing inTandem which was a very good decision. I went on the board and it workedout great as you know—as the world knows, not about my involvement butabout Tandem. In fact, I still have some HP stock as a result of Tandem goinginto Compaq, going into HP in a very noisy merger of about five years ago. Brook was a very hard worker. He worked a lot—not endlessly, but he reallyapplied himself to his job, and he understood technology from his engineeringtraining at a very fine engineering school, Georgia Tech, so that thetechnology issues were well within his grasp. He had a good sense of businessand people. He liked Jimmy Treybig; he liked the team of people at Tandem,and so he sized them up pretty well. I went down there, obviously, myself atime or two. I don’t remember exactly when that was, but it was fairly shortlyafter we got going, let’s say a year or two. We looked at lots of deals, turned down a lot of deals. But I think Brook’stechnical judgment, his judgment about people, and he has a very winningattitude. I think he was a high school half-miler, or something. Even though hewasn’t a college athlete that I know of, he has an athletic mentality aboutwinning and succeeding. He has that kind of drive that goes with successfulentrepreneurs and venture capitalists. I can’t remember all the deals we did.We did several others, Tandem being the outstanding one. After the end offive years Tom was expanding his organization so Brook said to me, “Whydon’t we form a partnership.” I said, “I’ll have to adopt you because it’s afamily partnership.” So he left with my good wishes and went with Tom in1977. I remember that pretty well. So it was a very good time, successful, wehad a good relationship—still do for that matter. He was actually Bob Swanson’s roommate during a lot of that time. They bothupgraded their roommates a lot! [laughter] So one reason we didn’t doGenentech was interesting. I had taken a course in molecular biology atStanford in the sixties, so I was sort of alert to the potential of it likeoftentimes a course or two or a professor influences you. So when I heard thatSwanson was starting to plan a biotech company that would do geneticengineering, I got quite interested. Swanson in their apartment was being quiteclosemouthed about what he was doing—as he should have been—so Brooksaid, “You know it would really make me sort of uncomfortable if we werebargaining with him and trying to get in his deal.” I said, “Well, all right.” Butwithout that I would have never gotten involved in Amgen. So things turn outsometimes for their own reasons. Brook and Bob were quite close friends.  40<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you think that Swanson can be credited with getting Brook interested inthe biological side of technology? Johnson: I can’t credit him, but I don’t doubt it. I’m sure they talked about it. I’m sureas roommates they had a beer and talked about stuff like that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, I think they were talking a lot. Johnson: He was very well aware of the process of forming [Genentech]. But of coursewe looked at other technology deals—one was maturing at that point, calledChromatronix, which was a deal that made high-precision gear forchromatography as well as build a very early protein sequenator, and theneven made a machine that manually could assemble nucleic acids into shortoligonucleotides. But that was very primitive, and that became the samethings we eventually did in Applied Biosystems, but we didn’t do that until1980. Brook had been gone three years by the time I did Amgen and AppliedBiosystems.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So was that sequenator a predecessor of what came from Lee Hoodeventually? Johnson: Oh yes. Lee Hood was an assistant professor then, just a young guy, and hewas advisor to Chromatronix which was in Berkeley. It was very much aBerkeley company. They were great young men that worked in that lab—theywere just good Berkeley radical-type of guys. And I say “good” now becausethe whole thing was kind of funny, and they were fine technicians. Dick Gundelfinger, the president, was a good solid guy—also a Berkeleyite inattitudes and so forth, but he worked pretty hard. Finally after quite a while wemerged it with Spectra-Physics, but I made a lot of relationships for thembecause I was the only guy who had a coat and tie, so I had to go and do boothduty in some of the conventions. It was really very primitive in terms ofventure capital. I also went back East and signed up Ken Reynan to be ourrep. Ken Reynan turned out to be a pretty good factor in the related businesseslater.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you in any way unusual in looking at the biology-based technologies atthis point? Johnson: Well, when I was in school there wasn’t any computer. I graduated in 1950from Stanford, in ’52 from Harvard Business School. So it was pretty noncomputer—there really weren’t many computers although there were some primitive ones. And genetic engineering, while I’m sure DNA was discoveredalong in those times, I really felt I needed to take a computer course, which Idid take at Stanford, and I took this molecular biology course taught by a guynamed Dow Woodward. It’s just amazing. It isn’t amazing—we all knoweducation makes a huge difference. One course changed my life, basically.Because I don’t know that I would have been so alert to Genentech or thewhole area or especially to Amgen when it came along or to AppliedBiosystems, which was formed the same year. But I’m sure my interest inbiotechnology—I’ve done a whole series of good biotech companies overtime—Chromatronix, Applied Biosystems, Amgen, Hybritech, and IDEC[Pharmaceuticals], and now one that I hope is going to be a great companycalled Novocell in the stem cell area. But I will have had over twenty yearssome terrific firms, and I don’t think I would have started down that pathwayif it hadn’t been for that course I took at Stanford. If you graduate from Stanford, then you can reenroll in undergraduatecourses—they call you a graduate at large, which my wife found an amusingstatement, seeing all the good looking young girls were in the classes. I tookthree. I took one course just for the heck of it, which did not have anyapplication that I could think of and didn’t turn out to be—in partialdifferential equations, because I never had covered that in my undergraduatedays. It just interested me. But the other two were definitely trying to broadenmy education to cover things that weren’t there when I was in school.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Which leads me to one of the questions that I had in mind: how important is itin considering an investment to know something about the technology? Johnson: Well, for me it is because I like science and technology. Even in high school,and all that stuff, I just ate up the courses. I loved them, did pretty well, notalways the top student, but I’ve just been fascinated by understanding the waythings happen. So my interest in technology—I’m enough of a businessman tothink about the economic side of it, but I find it stimulating, even now, to goand talk to some guy about something he’s doing in his lab that is novel or canbe of great use to people. And I’m not alone, a lot of venture capitalists are like this. We really like thetechnology. I’m not saying we can perform it in the lab, but we canunderstand it at a level, but that’s not the same. So actually, venture capitalistsget good at discussing things with a knowledgeable air about them. [laughter].But I delight a lot in technology, and I probably spend more time than wouldbe the most absolutely businesslike use of my time—but who cares. It excitesme! So I had great fun in the early days of Amgen, talking to George [B.]Rathmann, whom we brought in as president. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, start back further than that if you don’t mind, because my understandingis that George Rathmann really wasn’t the beginning of the story. Johnson: He was not at the beginning. The Amgen story is something like this. I’llprobably miss a name or two but— Bill Bowes was not with U.S. VenturePartners at that point; he was an independent private venture capitalist havingbeen with Blyth & Company for years. I think by then he’d left Blyth, or atleast he was making deals on his own. He had a guy he was co-investing withcalled Sam Alstetter, and if I have the story straight, and I may not, SamAlstetter was on an airplane and met a guy who was a Stanford professor—hisname is not coming to me right now.But anyway, this guy talked to Sam about starting a company that would takeadvantage of the developments in genetic engineering to form a biotechcompany. Sam told Bill about it. Actually Sam and Bill formed a corporationin about May of 1980 called Applied Molecular Genetics. Bill Bowes had alsocreated two other— You know how artists have a blue period? He had anapplied period. He named Applied Biosystems, which started off as part ofAmgen, actually, and then Applied Microcircuits, which I got involved withvery early on as a non-healthcare deal. So those were three deals called“applied”, all started out of the fertile mind of Bill Bowes, at least backed byhis believing in those areas. Bob [Robert T.] Schimke is that guy’s name that Icouldn’t think of a minute ago.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right. Johnson: A pretty good guy I might add, a nice guy. But his father became terribly ill. Ithink he was actually an early shareholder, but he couldn’t continue to be thechief scientist who ran the company. Then we did hire a guy, a scientist whohad been a New York U. sprinter to come out and head up the organization ofthree or four people.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that Winston Salser? Johnson: No, that was not Winston Salser. I should go to Winston Salser first, that’squite correct. Schimke knew Salser at UCLA, and so Bill went down to talk toWinston, and I did also a little later. Winston was the scientist around whomthe company was actually formed when Bob Schimke couldn’t do it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Of all the molecular biologists that are out there, why Winston Salser?  Johnson: I think your interview with Bill will tell you more than I can, but he metWinston Salser, and Winston agreed to be the forming scientist of thecompany. He had a good reputation and he was at a fine school, UCLA, so hewas working in the field. We did, at that point, hire this guy—I remember himbecause he had been a sprinter for NYU, and he came in and was heading upthe daily effort in the lab.But it was clear that he wasn’t going to be thepresident and the CEO.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. Johnson: Abbott, the company Abbott, had given a leave [of absence] to GeorgeRathmann, who was its chief scientist, to spend several months on sabbatical.He spent it in Winston Salser’s lab, coming up to date on the then latest inbiotechnology. So we met George in the course of that sabbatical. Winston, Ithink, suggested him to us. By then I was involved in it, a little after Bill—Icouldn’t give you the exact timing. They had formed it, and then a couple ofmonths later I made a smallish investment with my family partnership andwent on the board two or three months later, something like that. But therewas nothing going on. They treat me like a founder, and in a way I was,although Bill’s actually the founder and a very good man.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And who else was putting money into it? Johnson: Well, at that point it was just Sam Alstetter and Bill and our familypartnership. But soon afterwards, George Rathmann came on board, so I thinkthe next step is to talk about George Rathmann. I may be losing a fact or twobecause it is about thirty-eight years ago. George got interested in thecompany, and Bill and I talked to him. Finally, in a moment that’s recreatedover on my shelves over there—which we recreated later—George came andwe asked to see him. He was up here. So we went in my back yard and sat inthe back yard, and we asked George to join us—almost like asking someoneto marry you. We asked George to join us, and he said well, he was interested,but he was pretty sure Joy wouldn’t want to leave the North Shore of Chicago.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And you were pretty much going on Winston Salser’s recommendation? Orhad you checked him? Johnson: Well, no, Salser introduced us, he didn’t recommend him—well, I guess herecommended him, but Bill and I were making our own judgment here.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Had you done any background checking?  Johnson: Oh before that of course we did. We found out a lot about him. He’d been at3M, we talked to people there. We talked to some people quietly at Abbott.We didn’t want to blow his cover at Abbott. So no, we just didn’t go onWinston’s [introduction]—you don’t know Bill and me! [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I’m trying to get at the process as well. Johnson: We called—several phone calls to people, all of whom thought he was good.We had some side checks into Abbott, I don’t remember with whom. Wecertainly talked to people—at 3M I’m almost sure it was. People had a lot ofrespect for his energy and his science and his leadership. Of course, we metwith him a time or two, and we were very impressed by him too. So before weactually had the meeting where we asked him to marry us in my back yard, wehad met him a couple of times before. His response was interesting. “I reallyam interested, but I’m not so sure Joy’d like to come out to live inCalifornia”—from the life with the family they had in the North Shore. I can’ttell you the town—let’s say Highland Park or something. So we said right on the spot—bring Joy out here. We’ll fly her out, we’llobviously pick up the tab for that, and do bring Joy out so she can see Venturaand Oxnard. The company was already located in Thousand Oaks, and wedecided not to move it. So within a few weeks, a couple weeks, Joy came outand did love the beach at—was it Oxnard? It was Oxnard where they moved.There was a nice beach community there, and she was kind of fascinated byus, so then he accepted. We made an economic proposition, sort of a normalone, to bring somebody into a company. It was very late ’80 that thishappened. There’s a historical date that I can’t give you, so George came out,and I imagine he probably moved out in early ’81, but he agreed to come. I believe that Ray Baddour, from MIT, had been a co-investor. I skipped overRay. I came in [as an investor] and I think Ray Baddour came in shortly afterthat.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: With his own personal funds? Johnson: Just his own personal investment. These were small investments. WhenGeorge came on board, the first thing we needed to do was to raise somemoney. We cooked up a venture capital offering of— There was a bit of anargument about whether we raise a little money and try to get to a milestone,then raise more money at a higher price. George was pretty insistent, and weagreed with him, to raise a larger amount of money. I think the number was$15 million or so. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, it was $15 million. Johnson: You’re straining my memory. But for the purposes of discussion, it’s aboutthe right amount. So at that point Abbott came in, because they thoughtGeorge was pretty impressive, and Tosco, an oil company, I have no ideawhy. Oh, I know why they came in—because they thought we could developsomething to eat up oil spills.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I have a note about New Court partners. Johnson: New Court [Securities Corporation] was a venture firm based in England—that was the street they were on, New Court, but they had a New York office.They came in and then Jim [James C.] Blair and his firm came in.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now how was this happening? Were you calling around and telling peopleabout this opportunity? For example, how did New Court even know. Johnson: I don’t know exactly how New Court heard about it. It may be somebody Billknew. I made a couple of calls myself. I think I might have approached JimBlair. We were not looking for credit so much as money. [chuckling] Soeverybody made calls, and we got a bunch of people interested, but whoelse—am I leaving somebody out? Then some individuals, some friends ofmine like Bill Edwards and John Bryan, just individual investors, came in atthat point as well.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was it quite common in those days to have a number of very smallinvestments? Johnson: Investors?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You keep saying that these were not large investments. Johnson: I don’t remember the amount, but the amount which Abbott put in, the amountwhich New Court put in, the amount which Jim Blair’s company put in, thosewere hundreds of thousands.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, I see.  Johnson: I think my first investment was $60,000 if I remember right, and I put a littlebit more in this next round.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And was that kind of par for the course for you in those days? Johnson: Well, first of all, deals were smaller then. That was a big financing to do $14-$15 million in 1980. But having been an investor in almost the first round, atthe very opening of the company, later on that represented quite a bit of stock,still does. I wish I had these numbers better in mind, but the sense of it is thatwe then had a round of investors at a somewhat increased price whichincluded the people I’ve mentioned and probably some I’ve not mentioned,like a guy from Chicago who came in then. Steve Lazarus. But anyway, wehad this group that formed the basic board, and some of the people stayed onthe board quite a while. Then Abbott put a guy on the board, a guy namedKirk Raab who later became president of Genentech in a roundabout way wego through.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right, exactly! All the connections are amazing. Johnson: Steve Lazarus’s firm came in early on, from Chicago. Steve stayed on theboard for a long time. Steve was a very, very helpful director. He understoodthe business. Actually they all were. Baddour was a scientist and a good one.Bowes and I stimulated action, you might say. We had lots to do with pickingthe various CEOs over the years. We certainly picked George and thenGordon Binder. By the way, you should read Gordon Binder’s book [ScienceLessons].<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh I did. That’s one reason I waited to talk to you again. Johnson: I’ve only read about three chapters of it now.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, one thing that I found interesting, and this actually came from a set ofinterviews I did with George Rathmann. He said that the original setup wasthat the scientific advisory board, which was a luminous board— Johnson: Yes, it was.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: —was to report to the board of directors, and George said, “No way.”  Johnson: Yes, I don’t remember that issue. It never did. George may have rememberedsome discussion about that, but I don’t think it was ever much of an argumentthat the scientific advisory should report to the board. It wouldn’t work. Atfirst they reported to Winston Salser before George came, then they reportedto [George]. But they were distinguished. I can’t name them all, but there wasNorman Davidson from Caltech and a guy from Colorado—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, Caruthers. Johnson: Marv [Marvin H.] Caruthers from Colorado and then a guy named [Eugene]Goldwasser from Chicago.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Who became very important. Johnson: Oh, yes, they all were. Except for Genentech, there must have been other littlegames in town, but we were the main place where they could use theirexpertise to really make things happen, and they did. They met often andGeorge gave them terrific, stimulating leadership.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you think that by then it was obvious to molecular scientists that thecommercial aspects of the molecular sciences were going to take off, and takeoff not only scientifically and commercially, but in terms of generatingpersonal wealth. Johnson: I think you know, intuitively, personal wealth comes with success. But theidea of generating personal wealth as a primary objective was not in thefore—we knew it would happen. I don’t mean anybody was going to not wantto make some money, but the interest level of all of us was to build a greatcompany, do the things that were required to build a great company.Especially in biotech, you get so excited about what you can do to helppeople’s health, those things all put together. Completely unrelated to this, I remember talking to Bill Hewlett one time. Ihad a long talk fishing one time, and he said, and I had him tell this to myclass later, that when they started Hewlett-Packard, they were thinking aboutbuilding a successful company. They were talking about good products, goodmarketing, scraping enough money together to grow and that sort of stuff. Hesaid, “I wouldn’t say it never occurred to us, but that was not what we weredoing. We were not deliberately creating wealth. We knew if we succeededwe’d make out fine.” I don’t think they ever thought about the size of that, butthey concentrated on building a great company and the wealth resulted fromthat.  People who chase wealth directly, they get lost in short-term considerationsand they don’t do the underlying stuff, so the same thing was true there. I’msure we all thought we’ll be richly rewarded if we build a company that canserve patients well. That was not far from our minds. The objective was moreof a competitive, building, creative kind of feeling. I’m not trying to be naïveabout making money; I’m just saying that if you don’t think of doing thingsright to build a great company, then that won’t happen anyway. You might aswell bear down on that. I don’t ever remember having any of these guys I’vejust mentioned, say to himself or herself, “We’re going to get rich if we dothis right.” Even though behind that you always know you’ll at least do well.billion company. That never occurred to me we’d do that; I just thought we’dbuild a really good company that would take advantage of genetic engineeringand really do a lot for patients. We had four projects that we thought we would do. I hope I can name them.One was something to eat up oils spills, the one Tosco was interested in. Theother was chicken growth hormone. It turned out you couldn’t do it in the gutso you had to inject 50,000 chickens a day or something, so that didn’t seemtoo good. A third one was an acridine dye, some sort of dye, and the fourthone was EPO [Epogen or erythropoietin]. EPO was the one that worked. Sowe had four different projects, and we talked with investors about those. Wetalked to ourselves about them, and we pursued them all up to a little ways.I remember one amusing— Very, very early, I was walking up the sidewalktoward the lab, and this horrible purple caterpillar with all kinds of thingssticking out came walking, I thought, “Oh my God, they’ve done it!”[laughter] It just occurred to me briefly—they’ve created a monster, orsomething. It was going to be a butterfly later, I’m sure, but it looked prettyhorrible at the time.The way you keep score in our business, in the end, is what kind of profit youmake, what kind of companies you build, and whether they become worth alot more than you have in them. That’s the score-keeping. But in the back ofyour mind or at least in the middle of your mind one of the purposes is togenerate personal wealth, but you do it if you succeed.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right, so to summarize could I say— Johnson: She’s putting words in my mouth! [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: —that a cornerstone of your philosophy could be said to be that you build agood company and the money will follow.  Johnson: [pause] Yes. You concentrate on building a good company, which meansgetting the right people, having great products, marketing them well, having agood organization, and getting adequate financing in the thing to make ithappen. And those are the immediate objectives, because if you don’t achievethose things, the rest of it doesn’t count. But the fact is, you do know thatwhen you build a great company, you’ll make money from your investment.So it isn’t that you don’t know that, it’s just that you concentrate on the firstthings first. And the first things first is building the company. Lots of guyswill tell you this. I’m not alone in this way.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, but is that maybe not happening quite so much nowadays? Is theremore—the money comes first. Johnson: I haven’t heard that too much. I think that we’ve got to give some credit toKleiner, Perkins, Caufield & Byers. They do very nicely those guys. Butthey’ve had a philosophy early on to not discuss their personal wealth, not talkabout their big deals and all that stuff. And Tom Perkins himself started that,that’s why it was so surprising in that TV interview he did when he began totalk about his own personal wealth. It wasn’t very Kleiner, Perkins to do that![chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, well, and his biography, his autobiography makes it pretty clear too. Johnson: Yes, I read that too. So Tom, Tom was a very good venture capitalist. He’s agood person to be a friend of. This last few years he’s gotten excited about hisown personal wealth and the things it can bring. But the things he did the bestweren’t generating wealth. The things he did the best were building somegreat companies, which he did concentrate on at the time.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, he has made a big thing about being how he and Gene Kleiner were sovery hands on in terms of managing their investments. Johnson: Oh absolutely, they were. But now in his life, what is he—seventy-five andhe’s quite candid. I wouldn’t say he’s hiding any emotions, but he feels theneed to honestly say that he is spending a lot of money on yachts andaccoutrements of different kinds, and it surprised me, that’s all. He’sabsolutely free to do what he wants and he’s not a bad guy, but thoseinterviews I don’t think are doing him any favors.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, how would you compare your management, your idea of working with acompany’s management to maybe what Kleiner and Perkins did.  50 Johnson: Very similar.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is it. And so— Johnson: Brook surely picked [some of] that up here, that you’re heavily involved.There are three ways in which venture capitalists, the way I see it, [areinvolved with a company.] The first one, they provide money to give thecompany some capital to operate with. [The second], they provide advice andhelp, and on a frequent basis, weekly in young companies very often, certainlynot less than monthly. The balance is between advising the management andtrying to run the company yourself. If you get the management too dependenton you, or you’re too assertive and they get too resistant, you’ve got to get thisbalance of discussion of keeping things open so that people will ask you stuffsometimes. But the worst thing you want to hear is have a guy come to aboard meeting and he says, “I have three courses of action. Which one doesthe board want to take.” That’s really bad news when a guy does that. Whatyou want a guy or woman to come in and say is “Here’s where I want to go.”If you don’t like it then you can argue about that, but you don’t want themdependent on you for operating decisions. So you have money and you have advice and the third element is a little moresubtle. As I mentioned a little earlier in our talk, entrepreneurs are often verycompetitive, athletic-like people who like to win. They get enthusiastic,they’re hard-driving people, and they want to be a winner. They want theircompany to dominate a market, they want it to succeed in the market, theywant lots of things. And that kind of enthusiasm, which is not alone inathletes, it’s just athletic-like is what I’m trying to say—venture capitalistsoften share that. Entrepreneurs like to have someone who shares thatexcitement of the game, excitement of the chase, almost for its own sake—again not losing sight of what in the end, what’s there. So you have thissharing of desire and zeal. I call it zeal. Entrepreneurs have zeal and goodventure capitalists have zeal as well. When you put those things together, youoften have success.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So it is an emotional or motivational contribution, would you say? Johnson: That’s right. We contribute to that, and if we’re just very matter of fact andjust only look at numbers and criticize, that’s not enough. They should feelyour excitement, and you should feel excitement. If you don’t feel excitement,you’d better find another business. On the other hand, you’ve got to be hardnosed. You’ve got to ask people to step aside when they’re not doing the job.It’s not like it’s all fun. But that third element is not often mentioned inspeeches, but it’s an important part of venture capital. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I think what you’re implying is that there’s a very human element to all this,that personality counts. Your ability to size up and evaluate how anentrepreneur might actually function is part of it, is it not? Johnson: Yes, we look for zeal. We look for guys who give a damn—and women—thatwant to make things happen. You can be as bright technically, you canunderstand marketing, you can do all the intellectual part of it right. But if youdon’t yourself feel it and stimulate in your employees this same winning teamfeeling, you’re much less likely to succeed.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, if you think Amgen is a good example of this, I would like to hear moreabout how the mechanics actually work. How do you people, sitting on theboard of directors, interact with George Rathmann as CEO, with the scientificadvisory board, maybe even with the scientists in the company? How do allthose elements that go into a company actually work from your standpoint asthe venture capitalist? Johnson: It varies a lot with the personality of the CEO. So if you want to talk aboutAmgen specifically— When it was very young, we had monthly boardmeetings. They were down south. Bill and I were up here. We would sit down,Bill and I, from time to time with George just to review what was on his mind.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And George would come up here? Johnson: Yes, I can’t remember too many meetings up here, but we were in southernCalifornia—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You usually went down there. Johnson: We’d go down there, we’d stop by there because we were doing somethingelse. Then we had different committees on the board: we had a strategycommittee. The function of the strategy committee was interesting becauseAbbott was supportive with money and put good people on the board, butAbbott had its own axe to grind a lot. So we wanted to be able to meet andtalk about corporate strategies and things so that we could recommend to theboard courses of action without necessarily Abbott being present. Abbott onthe one hand was supportive and gave us money at a key time, and on theother hand, the guys that represented Abbott on the board also had Abbott’sbest interests in mind at all times, as well as ours. They were corporateexecutives; their job was to make Abbott prosper, and they showed that. Sowe had a strategy committee that did not include somebody from Abbott where we could talk about issues of our future, independent of what Abbottmight be doing.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And this was in a very general sense? How do we want to shape thiscompany? Johnson: Shape the company. Abbott had a lot of diagnostics work and there wasalways a concern by Abbott that we might go into diagnostics heavily. So wewanted to be able to talk about issues like that—although we didn’t ever do alot with diagnostics, by the way. Then the scientific advisory committeewould meet with George, and sometimes I visited one scientific advisorymeeting, but not normally. That was for scientists to talk about science.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But how did that information from the scientific advisory board— Johnson: It went to George.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Would George give a report at a board meeting? Johnson: No, George used it in his decision—George would take it and make practicalcourses of action out of it, like what project do they want to fund. Of course, itwould come up in the discussion of things he wanted to do, that the scientificadvisory board had recommended it or had thought this was a good area topursue. Then we had a guy named Dan Vapnek from University of Georgia to be ourchief scientific officer. He was very involved with the scientific advisoryboard, so he and George would talk about projects they wanted to do and thenthey’d bring that to the board. They would explain the science, they wouldexplain what some of the background was from the scientific advisory board.And then we had a science committee. That was a little bit controversial. Idon’t think Dan Vapnek really wanted a science committee. He didn’t want tohave a subcommittee where he had to report what was going on in science. Iwasn’t on that on purpose. We had the normal audit committees. We had a committee about directors andofficers and compensation—those were sort of mixed together. So it was thestrategy committee I already mentioned which was a very important—thiscommittee where really things were talked about. No action would be taken,but we had very candid discussions about things in kind of a closed meeting,and George was certainly active in that. But all the board meetings were wideopen. People could discuss things and there was no particularly hiddenagenda. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Which committee were you on? Johnson: From the beginning, oh let’s see. There was an executive committee from dayone. I’ve forgotten to mention that. So Bowes and I and George, I believe,possibly Ray Baddour, we had this executive committee that was empoweredto act for the board in-between meetings. We never did really, because wewouldn’t take a step even though we were authorized to do so without theboard knowing about it. But we’d meet from time to time in-between boardmeetings and review matters of note. I’d have to look in the records, butBowes and I and Rathmann, and I believe Ray Baddour was on thatcommittee too. But we gave George a place to hammer out stuff that he was hoping to sell tothe board later. [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was he a pretty good salesman? Johnson: A very good salesman! His enthusiasm—he could attract people to come workthere like nobody. Much, much later on, when he was the chairman of Icos[Corporation] but not the CEO, they had a change in presidents up there, andone of the directors called me and said, “We’re thinking about making Georgethe CEO of this company. What do you think about George as a CEO?” I said,“All he is is the best there is.” [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And wasn’t he, for those very early days of biotech, unusual in having such afirm business sense as well as the scientific background? Johnson: Yes, I think his— He was a physical chemist. I think his work at 3M was notinvolved [with business administration], but it certainly was in directingAbbott’s efforts. I think that he was in the higher levels there, and he just sawAbbott grappling with its business problems. I’m talking outside of my ownknowledge here, but he was a good businessman. He sensed markets andmarket sizes and what we might do to serve those markets. I may have mentioned this earlier—one of the great satisfactions of anybiotech deal is that the results of your work are certainly profitabilitysometimes, but it’s also the satisfaction of creating drugs that help people. Justthis last weekend, I was playing golf with a guy, and he said he’d been treatedfor lymphoma, and he was getting better. I said, well, was it non-Hodgkin’slymphoma? And he said, “Yes.” I said, “Are you taking a drug calledRituxan?” And he said, “Yes, I am and it’s working.” I said, “Well, that drugwas developed by IDEC,” another company I was involved in. It gave me awonderful feeling to think that after all those board meetings and jumping up and down—and of course, probably a million or maybe hundreds of thousandsof people it helped. But here I met with a guy who I was playing golf withpartly because Rituxan had kept him alive. It’s a great feeling. It’s a greatfeeling.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It’s different than producing widgets, isn’t it? Johnson: Not like a computer—well, okay—my computer frustrates me too!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, that brings me to another question. Amgen was founded in 1980. Johnson: Correct.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Genentech had been around for four years. Johnson: Correct, also.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But nobody—Biogen, Amgen, Genentech, Genetics Institute, none of them—had produced a product yet. An investment in any new venture has an elementof risk, but it seems to me that without a product even on the horizon, thatinvesting in these young biology-based companies had an exaggeratedelement of risk. Did you feel that? Johnson: Yes, but that’s what I was doing for a living. I was trying to back areas that Ifelt could be big and could be good, so that I didn’t think I could lose thismoney. I knew it, of course. I thought, here’s a chance to get involved ingenetic engineering early on in a company with a good person running it,although I was involved before George was. Without George, that companywould have faded away. It would have just been a loss. It was verystimulating.This is true of any venture: you don’t think about losing money, you thinkabout what an investment can do, especially startup venture capital in somestrange area. So you use your hunches, you use what you read, you use yoursense of the practicality of the science, where the science is workable. Youbring all that together on kind of a judgment call. I was trying to tell my classwhen I taught it—you can’t calculate all this. You should run the numbers—you have to run the numbers, but in the end you’ve got to have a sense ofbalance of the likelihood of success and what you need to do yourself to makethings succeed. And the venture capitalist can play a substantial role insuccess by selecting the right people, encouraging them, getting them incentivized, and then helping the companies devise strategy. That’s animportant venture capital function.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So it would not be correct to say that Amgen was just another investment,right? Did you know from the start that you were onto something good? Johnson: No, but I knew that the area was big. I saw along with others the fact thatgenetic engineering was going to change the way we developed differentdrugs to treat people, because we could create human hormones using otherorganisms, and we could put human genes into other organisms, in this case E.coli or Chinese hamster ovary cells, and make them produce things thatpeople needed. If you’re short of something in your own body, but we couldmake it in a lab and give it to you, then that is basically what is done withgenetic engineering. There’s also monoclonal antibodies that are generated byhybridomas, which is a slightly different thing, but it’s all part of the samegame. But the answer to your question is, you know it’s going to be a big area. Whatyou don’t know is, is your company going to be the one that makes it. That’swhere the footrace comes in, that’s where the competitive zeal makes a bigdifference, besides the judgment and the ability to finance it. One of the risklevels that you have to think about is will you be able to get enough moneytogether to make this thing succeed? Companies can get a great idea withgreat leadership. If they don’t have enough money they can’t develop theirproducts. And as you just pointed out, it took a long time. I don’t think we hadEpo on the market—we had it approved, but I don’t think we started selling itfor about ten years.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It was a long time. And did that come as a surprise to you? Were youexpecting it to take so long to actually produce a product? Johnson: It was not a surprise. We knew it would take a long time. We knew by theFDA process. Maybe it was a little longer than I’d hoped for, but I don’t thinkit was a surprise, because in our meetings we would talk about where aproduct was in the lab. First of all it took us a while to even select Epo out ofthe ones that we had available to us. The impracticability of the chickengrowth hormone, the stuff to eat up the oil spills—I didn’t even know whythat didn’t go ahead. It just maybe didn’t work very well, and the dye—thisability to make a different dye. But we started to focus on Epo pretty early onand—[pause to change tape] <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: At the risk of spending too much time on the beginning of Amgen—but youwere there. Johnson: I was there all right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: At the beginning. At that time there was concern about biohazards related torecombinant DNA. One of the things that had frustrated George Rathmann atAbbott was that the company went overboard in being concerned aboutbuilding elaborate laboratories. The company had decided, for whateverreason, to be ultra cautious in regard to their handling of recombinant DNA,so much so that at least in Rathmann’s opinion it pretty much tied their hands. Johnson: I didn’t realize that about Abbott or George’s opinion of that. But I don’t thinkGeorge made that a major factor in telling us why he might come with us.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you remember any discussion at the board level about the NIH guidelines[for recombinant DNA research], and there were certain kinds of research thatwere considered dangerous. Johnson: Oh absolutely. I remember the discussions and I remember the NIH guidelinesfor sure, but that had more to do with containment in the labs of things wewere doing. Not so much how the drugs might adversely affect people. Wehad certain rules about the rooms and positive pressures, and we followed theNIH guidelines quite closely because they were sensible.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And yet if you remember, the NIH guidelines technically applied only toinstitutions that were receiving federal funds, but as far as I know, almost allthose early companies followed them. Johnson: Yes, we followed them. I remember the discussions. I didn’t go and inspectthe labs and know everything, but I know as a policy we adopted the NIHguidelines for the conduct of our labs, because otherwise what would you goby? Your own rules—you might not understand all the issues. I don’tremember any specific discussion, but I remember clearly the NIH guidelinesand the company’s decision to follow them. I can’t give you a dramaticmoment, though.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I would think, too, that a consideration would be, if we don’t follow theguidelines, it’s not going to be politically attractive.  Johnson: I don’t think that was an issue. I think the issue was, we need to follow someguidelines which have been set by people who probably know what they’retalking about, to keep the genetic engineering activities inside the building orinside a certain lab and a certain [fume-extraction] hood, because it is truethings could get out. Sometimes we think well, that’s pretty far-fetched. Idon’t think there was a thought about it might be politically bad or we mightget sued. I think George had a very strong sense of responsibility to not letthose things happen. Yes, we would have been sued if we’d done bad things,yes, it would have been politically bad—maybe in the back of the mind, butthat was not in the forefront of the discussion.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did that mean building more secure laboratories? Johnson: More secure than what?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, than the usual lab-bench way that molecular biology had been done upuntil then. Johnson: Our labs were built from the beginning with that [security] in mind. In otherwords, we didn’t have to change them. Since I wasn’t there spec-ing the labsand watching the construction and making sure, all I can tell you for sure isthe company had a policy from the earliest days of following the NIHguidelines about containment. What I can’t tell you is if we did follow themthat closely, but I think we did. And that was George’s policy, and why not. Itwas a sensible decision. It just seemed practical. You’d read them all, you’dsay—well, come on is that really a potential [danger] or are they overworrying it? Well, maybe they were, but I think the issues that were more ofconcern were, can we purify these hormones enough in the process so thatthey do what we want them to do and nothing else? But that was a level ofdetail beyond what I normally dealt with. Policy yes, absolutely.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What about a stock option plan for employees? Johnson: We had it from the beginning.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that pro forma? Johnson: It was common, yes. We knew that if you’re going to attract good people,whether they’re scientists or down the line, you want to have a plan so thateverybody feels like an owner, and that if you had an option and the company succeeded greatly, then people were incentivized by that. We even hadoptions before we went public. Options became controversial later whenpeople felt that people were manipulating the option prices, and that was aftercompanies were public. But I don’t know if we ever had any problems withthat issue at Amgen. But we had an interesting group of people who very earlyon had a nice set of options and made a lot of money from their options andkept on working. We called them our volunteers. [chuckling] They didn’thave to work, they just loved it. They went out there and developed productsand enjoyed it. A couple of guys moved to Montana and went fishing, butthat’s their business too. The last of the major volunteers just retired here acouple of months ago.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, that’s a pretty long history of volunteering! Johnson: Oh yes, the guys from the beginning with those early options made millions ofdollars. And should have and deserved it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But had it been commonplace for you, in investing in companies prior to that,to see that an employee stock option plan was instituted? Johnson: Yes, it was common.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So it’s not something that came with biotech. Johnson: It’s not something Amgen invented. We just thought it was necessary. I thinkthe issue had to do with how widespread are options. In other words, theexecutives always had them, but we had options at Amgen all the waydown—everybody had at least some options. I think that’s true.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Everybody—the bottle washer. Johnson: I think so, yes, I’m pretty sure everybody had some. They were small for thepeople that were—but it was helpful to them.I remember I had a meeting with Fidel Castro once, and I had just given a talkat a meeting in Havana. This is about ten years ago or more perhaps. They hadtwo major biotech labs there, both of which could have been companies. So inmy talk to a biotech group I said how they should take tthese labs, make theminto companies, give the executives and all the employees some options sothat they could have ownership and raise capital from outside of— Theycouldn’t do it in the United States, but to raise capital from elsewhere.  So Castro said in this long meeting that started at 10 p.m.,“Tell me what yousaid. My son was there—Fidelito—tell me what you said.” And I told himwhat I said. He already knew what I said, by the way. I wasn’t fooled for aminute. So he said, “Well, Mr. Johnson, I’ve just been telling you how wespent years here trying to achieve social justice. If we did the things yousaid”— (He had a wonderful interpreter. I know enough Spanish to hear itdirectly, but I worked through an interpreter, as wisely I should, but she wasperfect.) “—some people would have more money than others and we’reworking toward social justice.” So I said, “Well, Mr. President”—everybodyelse called him comandante, but I said, “Mr. President, if some people hadmore money than others, but everyone lived better because of that, couldn’tyou call that social justice too?” And he said, coldly but not hostilely, “Mr.Johnson, I know those arguments.” [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You’re not going to change my mind. Johnson: No, no. He wasn’t about to. But I thought as long as I was invited to go, and Ifinally talked the State Department into letting me go— The big issue wasflying my own plane there. You have to get a special permit to go to Cuba,and it took me a long time to get that, but I did go and had a very interestingvisit. They had major efforts in biotechnology there, and so I was glad to godown. The State Department said, “How do we know you’re not going to helpthem?” I said, “I am going to help them understand. That’s the point—to helpthem understand the business so they can maybe change their society a littlebit.” So they finally bought that argument.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Very interesting. You made it pretty clear that in the beginning, the array ofAmgen’s products was very broad. You mentioned indigo, chicken growthhormone, et cetera. Johnson: They were potential products. They weren’t products.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Potential products. Johnson: They were things that we thought we could do with the technology. One ofthem worked. [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, talk about what I’m presuming was a change of tactics when Amgenbegan to become a therapeutics company. Am I right in that? Johnson: EPO is a therapeutic.  60<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, it is. Was it EPO that switched things to therapeutics? Genentech also atthat point had a pretty broad product line. Johnson: We never went very far with those other [projects]. Those were like thebrainstorming, original ideas when Amgen was founded. None of the otherthree went very far. The company’s first job and its first achievement was tomake EPO in quantity in a lab, get it through the FDA, and to get it intopeople’s hands to build up red blood cells. There are two other kinds of bloodcells that are of interest. Leukocytes are white blood cells. Erythrocytes arethe red blood cells. And then there’s something called platelets. So we thoughit was a natural if we could assist people to build up their white blood count,which is necessary, it turned out later, during cancer treatments when yourimmune system gets compromised. And then platelets—we thought we’d havethose three products. Well, we never did develop a good platelet product untillately. Now they have one. That was supposed to be the three big deals.Epogen and what we called that Neupogen.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: The neutrophils. Johnson: For neutrophils, and it was called G-CSF—granulocytes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, colony-stimulating factor. Johnson: We never did say, “Let’s become a therapeutics company.” Our product forplatelets—I don’t remember what the problem was—it didn’t work out. So wepushed ahead with those two products [Epogen and Neupogen] and theybecame major products. Then we bought a company that had Enbrel, to treatrheumatoid arthritis, and that became another $3 billion-level product. People often worry about our pipeline, but right now we have this— I’m noton the board, but I can certainly speak about public information. We have aproduct, Denosumab, which will have a dual purpose. One is treatingosteoporosis, mostly in women. In bone cancer, the bones become very weak.We have found in some clinical trials so far that the treatment with this stuffcan prevent the bones from getting so weak, because it stops the mechanismby which the bone is destroyed. There’s something called osteoclasts. I’mthrowing these names around as if I really understand it, but osteoclasts areinhibited by this Denusomab. And so if they’re right, then women who aretaking other drugs, once a week or once a month, can have a semi-annual shotthat should relieve them of problems with osteoporosis. There’s quite a fewbone cancer cases where bones get very brittle and fracture easily. This shouldbe a major help there. Of course, it’s not on the market yet. It’s not throughthe FDA, but these are the indications that look good, at least as far as I know in the public information that I have. I get zero inside information fromAmgen anymore, on purpose. [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is there a story around the IPO? Johnson: Oh not too big a story. We decided we needed, I think it was, 40 millionbucks. It’s pretty close to the right number. We talked to a number ofinvestment bankers. At that point in history it was possible to go public onhigh hopes, which we certainly had. We went public and recharged our gastanks with cash. But I don’t remember an exciting story about it. I don’tremember a moment of crisis or a difficulty in pricing or investment bankersbehaving badly. I don’t remember who the investment banker was, but it wasa good smooth transaction.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: The only side issue that I remember from reading Binder’s book is that he wasactually on the stock market floor at the IPO. Apparently there was a gaspwhen the trading began and the share price fell below the $18 that had beenset. Do you remember that? Johnson: No, I didn’t. The stock did go on up, not sharply. Genentech went up threetimes [starting share price] when it was offered, but our stock did okay. Iwasn’t there and I don’t remember the story. I think I remember hearing that itdipped down for a while and then went back up. But I don’t remember hearingany gasps.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But you weren’t there with your white knuckles. Johnson: No, I wasn’t there. At that point I knew the company had a very good chanceof success, and going public was a way of getting some money. Once we gotthe money, the immediate stock price was not of great interest to me.Obviously, it was of some interest because we wanted it to be a successfuloffering.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I’m wondering if you could say something in general about how yourassociation with Amgen was, or was not, typical of your investments. Johnson: Well, it was typical in one sense. I’ve had a number of good things that cameto me through very close business associates and friends like Bill Bowes. Iheard about Amgen from Bill Bowes; he wanted me to be involved. It was amutual thing, so it wasn’t that he just did me a favor, although certainly it wasa great favor, but he also wanted to have somebody that he could trust and could work on the deal with him, and that was me. So it was pretty typical forme to get involved in something where somebody knows us or me. It’s also quite typical for us to dig out deals where we are the first investors.[For example],a very long-time association [was] with a very good companycalled Boole & Babbage, which ended up quite successful, but it was a long,long time. I used to co-invest with these three or four other individuals—JohnBryan, Bill Edwards, and—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You mean routinely you would. Johnson: Routinely in the sixties and seventies. And [with] some other people—HaleBrothers and Bill Draper quite often. But anyway, so John Bryan heard aboutthese two guys that were starting this really first software products company,so I heard about it from them. But they just said, “Here’s a lead.” I get allkinds of leads. So that’s one where I sized it up myself in 1967, thought I’dget involved with these guys, and got involved and stayed involved for a longtime. But I don’t know whether I was too patient or not making somemanagement changes, but by bringing in people, running it myself for a fewweeks at a time in between managements— Boole and Babbage is probably adefining long-term investment. I stuck with it for a long time, and we did verywell. In the end it merged with BMC Corporation, which is doing okay. It’slike everything else, the old Boole business is fading off, with one majorexception. The thing that would typify me and our office is heavy involvement with thecompanies. Substantial involvement. I don’t have any companies, really,where we don’t—where one of us in the office isn’t either— Sometimes we’renot on the board, we’re observers, and rarely we’ll be into a deal wheresomebody else looks after it. We just don’t do that much. There’s severalreasons that I’m into heavy involvement in companies. I like it. I like the kindof men and women that run companies, so I like being with them. I like theexcitement of the competition that we talked about before, sharing that withthem. And I like the idea as a technically trained but not necessarily technicalperson, I like being able to use, to help make judgments that involve technicaldecisions without trying to be a technician about it. The other thing, which is not necessarily very businesslike is I really lovetalking to the engineers and seeing what’s going on about the technology. I’dsay if there’s a characteristic that I have, I hope the most important one ishonesty, and I try not to fail myself there. But the other one is involvement inthe companies. But I don’t always give good advice. I’ve made mistakes. I’vehired people that didn’t work. We all have had a series of things we couldhave done differently, but it’s a batting average, you know? And my battingaverage is good. I’m not the greatest slugger in the business, but I’ve got a good solid batting average for a long time. But involvement would be thecornerstone of what I believe venture capital is. Involvement and help to thecompanies.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I think that’s a good place to stop. Johnson: Okay.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It is the third session and it’s July 7, 2008. Johnson: That it is.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: On our first phone call, you told me that the old guard, and I’m paraphrasingwhat you told me, doesn’t call it venture capital. Johnson: Doesn’t call it VC.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, the abbreviation. Johnson: Yes. We call it venture capital all the time. We don’t say VC. All young guysand women say VC, and the press calls it VC. But it just seemed kind ofslangy at the time. Maybe we were trying to take ourselves seriously. I don’tknow why, but I’ve kept up the habit of calling it venture capital. And most ofthe old guard do, but they’re all inactive now, mostly. At least, they’reobservers on the side a little bit like me, although I’m pretty active. But VC iscommonly used. I know what it means. I just notice it when people say VC,but there’s really nothing wrong with it. Venture capital is the name of thebusiness, and we just don’t use a nickname for it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: The other thing that I remember your saying in that same phone call was thatyou don’t consider venture capital a financial business. Johnson: No, I don’t. It’s not primarily a financial business, no. It’s substantiallyfinancial, but there’s really three parts to it. The first part, obviously isproviding capital to companies; the second part is providing guidance and assistance and help with a number of duties other than direct management;and the third one is more subtle, but it’s there—and that is that entrepreneurs,the men and women that start companies, are quite competitive. They’reathletic in that sense of the word. Some have been athletes, some haven’t, butthey have that drive to succeed, this unwillingness to fail, that’s characteristic.The venture capitalists—the good ones—the best ones, share this enthusiasm,this zeal that they have. So they sense that you’re as zealous as they are tosucceed. We all know there’s money to be made, we’re all doing it in the end, Isuppose, because it’s profitable. But there’s another side to that—it satisfiesour competitive instincts and satisfies us to be winners. And that is a spiritwhich almost every entrepreneur I know shares. They don’t want to win at allcosts, because for lots of reasons, including they want to make some moneywhile they’re going in, but winning is important. So I would say you’dcontribute money, you contribute advice, and you contribute zeal to thesecompanies. The third one—people could argue that one all day, but I think it’simportant. It’s certainly important in entrepreneurs. I look for it every time Imeet somebody—do they give a damn about whether they succeed or not?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you think that third element is something that is more typical of the firstgeneration of venture capitalists? Johnson: Well, the young guys and women are terrific. I wouldn’t second guess at alltheir skills, the devotion they have to the business. There’s probably a littleless attention to that. One thing that’s happened is the funds have become big,and the money to be made from ordinary income, from managing the money,has become high. So it has become, partly because of the presence of privateequity, you would say on the scale a little above us, has made a lot of guys toact like they’re in a financial business. I’ve had people say, “You’re in thefinancial business.” Or, “You’re a financial man.” I always deny that. I say,“I’m a venture capitalist, which is a hybrid.” No, I think the young generationof men and women that are in venture [capital] are terrific. They examinethings a lot—but I don’t suggest that they don’t have that quality of helpingcompanies. Now sometimes they don’t know how, if they’re tooinexperienced and they interfere—but that’s the danger of helping. And manyof them want to succeed, but it’s so large now. I come from an era, Bill Draper and I in particular, although he was withSutter Hill for a long time which did manage other people’s money. Basicallyour firm, and some others, because they go back, primarily manage their owncapital within the office. We have a few outside investors too that we broughtin who wanted to be with us for those reasons, including one Indian tribe that Ilike. But we’re basically managing the capital within this office, mostly ourown family. So we have a different kind of attitude. We take a little longer. We’re not in any big rush to get things done. Although the latest thing we didis structured as a fund because it does have some other investors. But the business is probably more financial now than it was, because there’sso much money to be made from management fees, and that wasn’t true[before]. In the old days—all guys talk like this—we didn’t even take thewhole management fee. We said we’d make the money on the investmentsand on the carry when we had some other people’s money in, but not on themanagement fees. But now everybody takes all the management fees,including us, that are coming.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you take some management fees? Johnson: Oh absolutely, always, yes. Feed the kids and all that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But the percentage has gone up? Johnson: No. It always has been a custom of when you had outside investors of taking a2.5 percent management fee and 20 percent of the profits. Some of the firmsbump that percentage of profits up. I don’t know many that bump thepercentage of capital for management fees up. Some firms get 30 percent ofprofits, maybe even more. I just don’t know all the deals. But now, the abilityto earn a lot of ordinary income is part of the reason people come into thisbusiness, which makes it more of a financial business. It doesn’t make it aworse business, but it’s a very difficult business because it’s very hard to getliquid now. Almost no public market exists at this moment. Mergers are theonly—the sale of a company is about the only way out. Every so often somereally hot deal pops up and it goes public, but not lately. Google and eBay andsome of those did very nicely as new public companies, but that was a whileback that they did that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I read just this morning on the National Association of Venture Capitalwebsite that there were no IPOs in the second quarter of 2008, and it was thelongest period since 1978 that that had been true. Johnson: Well, I remember in 1972, Coherent—then called Coherent Radiation nowcalled Coherent, went public. I think there was only about five in the month ofMay of 1972. I think I have my dates correct. But that’s not zero.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: No, it’s not. But it is zero this quarter. Does that strike terror in your soul?  Johnson: I think it’s changing the venture capital business. If it doesn’t change, we’regoing to look more like private equity than we are like venture capital. Thenature of our country is that for a long time it’s been good to start a company,build it up, either take it public to get more capital and to get liquid from yourinvestment. It was a cycle of investment, go public, give the company furthergrowth capital, and it gives the investors and some of the management achance to cash out a little bit. That was the cycle. It was about a five- toseven-year cycle from startup to liquidity. That cycle has disappeared, partly because of the excesses, I guess we couldsay just to lump them, of the late nineties, when people took companies publicwith nothing but high hopes and a good Website and plenty of hits, with noplan for being profitable or growth. People bought on anything that soundedlike Internet and a lot of people lost a lot of money, and it really destroyed,after 2000, the public market—not destroyed completely, but if you couple itwith the financial crises of last year, the subprime lending and all that, and alot of discouragement, why, it’s just not possible to go public. I feel certain that the cycle of startup company, build it up to many tens ofmillions, a few tens of millions, be profitable and have good prospects—therewill come a time when people will invest in those things. I don’t blameSarbanes-Oxley entirely, although it’s very cumbersome to be public nowbecause of the reporting requirements and the expense. Part of it’s calledSection 404, which has what to me are onerous reporting requirements. I dothink Sarbanes-Oxley did some important things, though, so I’m not against it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What do you consider important? Johnson: Oh, I think it caused more accountability, caused more visibility. Some of thereporting requirements are good—it made the presidents, the CEOs takeresponsibility for the financial statements, which is one single good thing—they’ve got to sign off on them now.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did that mean that before, the CFO signed off? Johnson: Yes, the CFO and the audit committee. It wasn’t like there was no oversight,but people got, especially when it got to be hot on those backdating optionsand all that stuff, some companies did the things that we were worried aboutthat Sarbanes-Oxley solved. Sarbanes-Oxley was not completely unnecessary,and like all reactions, I think it overreacted in terms of loading smallercompanies—big companies, it costs them about the same as a little companyto go through all these reportings. But I’ve seen the kind of money and the tension that young public companies— So companies don’t go public or theygo public in London because they don’t have to do that there.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh I see! So it has changed the market. Johnson: It has changed it a little bit, but that’s not the real [problem]. The problem isthat there’s no appetite in the marketplace for the securities of little companiesnow. People have been stung too much. I’m sure the investment bankerswould take things public despite Sarbanes-Oxley if they could sense that theycould sell the stock. So if you have a young company, $25 million sales, $30million sales, that needs another 15 million bucks, right now it’s impossible.It’s almost impossible to go public with a company like that because there wasso much disappointment in the high hopes that were so prevalent in the late1990s and the year 2000.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you think that the experience of the bubble had a cautionary effect onentrepreneurs and venture capitalists? That maybe you shouldn’t rush thingsso much, and that you have to make sure that your company is really going tosurvive and be profitable before you even think about an IPO? Johnson: Yes, I think it did change the nature of deals. For a while it was almost like aninsult—I’m overstating of course—to ask a guy who’d bring in a businessplan—well, what is the profitability? What is the growth? He’d say, “Oh, Ihave a great website; it’s got this many hits. You’re an old-fashioned thinkerlooking for profits and growth.” Well, I remember one incident at dinner witha guy and his wife. He was polite about it, but he thought that those were oldfashioned questions. People did build up heavy market values, took thingspublic without any profits—without even really any sales in some cases!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you ever tempted in that direction? Johnson: Tempted? Yes. Resisted mostly. We did some deals, but we never did anydeal that we didn’t think would become profitable. Tempted by the hot marketand the ability to go public pretty fast, yes, but never with one that didn’t havea business plan that showed profitability in a few years’ time.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you were still looking at the fundamentals? Johnson: We stuck with fundamentals, and a lot of people made a lot of money doingthe other things. In fact, we had a big argument in the venture communitybecause everybody knew it was a bubble, everybody knew that it wouldn’t goon. But the argument was, you have a duty to make money for your limited partners the best you can. And if you know things can go public quickly andyou can make a lot of money in a quick, multiple turnaround in a short timewith extremely high IRRs [internal rates of return], the argument was you owethat to your limited partners. Make money for them, that’s what they investedfor.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But the other side of that argument would be, I’m also responsible for themoney that I’m responsible for. Johnson: That was my side of the argument, yes. [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It’s sort of handy to forget that part of it! Johnson: But those guys weren’t wrong. I’m talking about very conscientious, fine menand women in venture firms, who felt that you could make money for a whiledoing that. So nobody could predict, really, when the bubble would end, butthey said, “While we’re in a bubble, let’s make money in the bubble.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you think that acting in that fashion has had a lasting effect above andbeyond the economic downturn? Johnson: Yes. It was painful, and a lot of people were hurt by the so-called high-techbubble. But 2000 was eight years ago, and so pretty soon the greed willovercome the pain. I’ve been through a lot of cycles now. I can’t give you allof them, but ups and downs, and [venture capital] always has come back. Now, can we say we’re in a different time of the world where the publicmarket for small companies won’t come back? I doubt it. I don’t know when.It won’t be in the next year or so, because of the general slowness of theeconomy. Money being spent on healthcare isn’t going down. Now they couldhave legislation in the next few years that will make it very difficult orunprofitable to start a healthcare company, but we have a worldwide lead inbiopharmaceuticals and in pharmaceuticals and biotech. If we set up taxes anddifficulties so that we don’t encourage that side of our business, it would be abad thing. But I don’t think we will, no matter who gets elected. I’m a littlescared sometimes about heavy leftward movements, but I really don’t know. Ijust know that we just can’t throw that away. It would be throwing away away in which the United States leads the world.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: One of the hot areas was, at least before this downturn, clean technology,which of course ties in with all the concern about global warming.  Johnson: Yes, that hasn’t gone down at all.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Will that still be an area of investment? Johnson: Yes, it is now. Some firms have really specialized in it. Kleiner, Perkins,Caufield & Byers set up a whole division or a whole group of men andwomen to do that. But clean technology deals are mostly not things that aresmall startups. They’re mostly big companies in existence because you’retalking about engines and fuels and ways of changing the ways in whichfactories are built and those kinds of things. We’re small enough so that weare not guys who invest tens of millions of dollars at a time. Some venturefirms do, and many private equity firms who come in later and do buyouts,they do that. Green tech will stay hot for quite a while, which is a good metaphor sincewe’re worried about global warming. Now whether those companies will besuccessful, how they’ll make money, how they’ll go public—I don’t knowthat. We’re not doing much of that, not because we’re against the environmentgetting better, it’s just not something where we can do investments. Now if wefound something that’s a small startup that we felt we could finance whichmight lead to a big company, we might consider that. But I think most of thetransportation systems and really big money deals are what green tech isabout. My own view is that we’ll find some balance. I don’t know, speakingfor myself, what the balance is between global warming being caused by anatural cycle and how much is caused by people. All I know is for sure,people are causing some of it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, they are. Johnson: So I think we should control what we can control without ruining oureconomy. So I’m not too much of a skeptic, but global warming has becomekind of a religion. It has a book, it has a prophet, it has apostates, it has peoplebeing punished for not being believers. So it has all those characteristics, andyou’ve got to step back from it and say, “What’s going on? What’s reallyhappening here?” In the last couple of weeks I’ve heard maybe Greenlandisn’t melting as fast as we think, but I think the environment is warming upover the decades and century or so. If CO2, in fact greenhouse gases, arecausing part of it or a lot of it, we should try to do something about that. Fromthe venture capital point of view, green tech, that general area, is hoping to dosomething about that problem.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Are the social implications of a business one of your considerations ininvesting in a company?  70 Johnson: Yes, we do think about that. I think it tends to bet in more of a negative sense.First of all, at the personal satisfaction level, a successful biotech companywhich leads to drugs that relieve or cure really difficult ailments, gives you atremendous sense of satisfaction. We’re working on a company right now,which we believe will cure Type 1 diabetes, which is a heck of a thing. Otherpeople are working on it too. We believe we’re on the right track using humanembryonic stem cells to produce beta cells that are in your pancreas, and thenwhen you have glucose in your blood, they will secrete insulin and do justwhat a pancreas is supposed to do. But for many young people, because ofimmune reactions earlier in their lives, their pancreas is essentially madedysfunctional. Type 2 diabetes is for older fat guys without exercise, butthere’s many, many more cases of Type 2 than Type 1. They’re almost likedifferent diseases. One, you can’t use your insulin; the other one you can’teven make any, to oversimplify of course. Some of it can’t be cured, but a lotof it could be cured by people staying thinner earlier in their lives and keepingup their exercise—and I’m no one to talk. [chuckling] Although so far, Ihaven’t got Type 2 diabetes or Type 1.But just to get back to that—if this company succeeds, of course, it’ll be quiteprofitable. All these young men and women, we know that they have to takeinsulin—you can’t really do that your whole life. You can control it for a longtime, but over time people have problems because they take too much or taketoo little. They have hypoglycemia, they have hyperglycemia, and it takes atoll on your organs, even on your limbs. So it’ll just be hugely satisfying ifthis thing works. We’ve had a lot of zeal go into that company as well asmoney.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Looking back on your investments over these many decades, has it been themedical applications that have inspired you in this way more than other linesof business? Johnson: I’ve found more personal satisfaction when we have letters from men andwomen saying, “Oh you helped me so much.” Amgen used to get great lettersfrom people with anemia who weren’t anemic any more, and they’d say, “Mylife has just changed. Thank you so much.” Amgen is very profitable, too, atthe same time. But Tandem Computers was very satisfying because it filled aniche in the computer area—distributing data processing and non-stopdependable computing. It was very satisfying when Tandem succeeded sowell, but I didn’t get that extra little bump from people being cured. But on the other hand, my cautions are not getting involved in businesseswhich I think, even though they’re legal, may not be any good for society.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What are you thinking of?  Johnson: Well, a guy came in one time and said that he had a terrific idea for a house ofprostitution in Nevada, which is legal, and he had all these business plans. Isaid, “Look, I don’t care, I don’t care.” [chuckling] “I don’t want to be in thatbusiness, period. I think it’s legal, and I think you may make a lot of money,but I just don’t care about that.” That’s an extreme example of what I mean. Idon’t want to be in that business period! [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I want to get back to one of the statements that you made in thebeginning, which was something along the lines that Asset Management doesbusiness in house—I’m paraphrasing. Johnson: We have a few outside partners, mostly families that know us and this oneIndian tribe that heard about us. But most of the capital is from my wife andmy kids and me.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, so that obviously gives you a lot of control, arguably more control than ifyou have Kleiner, Perkins partners determining an up or down, or yes or nosituation. Johnson: The way we do it here is pretty much like that. We have a group of three of uswho are general partners. The fact that I have such a heavy limited partnershipinterest doesn’t give me much of a legal right anyway. Even though I’m aheavy limited partner along with the rest of my family and some otherfamilies, when we’re in a meeting, as we were up until this meeting started—We have three general partners and three people whom we call partners.They’re not legally, technically, but they’re very much part of our team. Sowe argue quite vigorously about things, and we happen to have it so any of thegeneral partners can say no to a deal.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And that would hold? Johnson: Even when I wanted to do it—yes, they could say no.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Even though it’s basically your money? Johnson: Yes. That’s just the way I set it up so that we had more of a partnershipoperation. Now, when we had the straight family partnership, I was the onlygeneral partner. That thing is still operating, with additional investments in olddeals. I do have the sole say so and I exercise it. But we just felt it would bemore healthy to have a more normal general partnership relationship wherelegally two or three of us, I think, could overrule the other one. But as a practical matter we’ve agreed that if we don’t all like a deal, we’re not goingto do it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And that’s just a gentlemen’s or gentlewomen’s agreement? Johnson: Well, gentlewomen can make gentlemen’s agreements, yes. These are allthree guys.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] It’s not a legal part of the partnership? Johnson: Oh, it is a legal part of the partnership that the general partners have toapprove the deals, absolutely. I don’t think it’s in the partnership agreementthat it has to be approved by all the general partners, and that even though wedon’t have equal ownership, we have equal votes in the management. It maybe that we set up the partnership so that legally all the managerial partnershave to approve a deal.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Am I hearing you, though, that aside from deciding that maybe you need somemore voices in decisions, that there also were legal aspects that bent youtoward having more voices in the future? Johnson: Well, you set up a general partnership—the limited partners really havenothing to say about those decisions.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I’m talking about your partners. Johnson: Well, I have to separate my—I have two hats on. I have a hat as a familymember and as a person that’s invested as a limited partner. My other hat isI’m a general partner in the firm and there are two other general partners.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, and I’m talking about the general partners. Johnson: Well, the nature of a limited partnership is that the general partners make thedecisions. And if the limited partners make the decisions, they lose theprotections of being limited partners.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I know that.  Johnson: I suppose you’re right—one reason we have a partnership setup is so that ifanybody ever questions, did you make decisions as a limited partner? I say no,I made my decision as a general partner along with other general partners.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Had you gotten burned when you were operating as the sole general partner? Johnson: No, never got burned.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What prompted you to make the switch then? Johnson: Because we brought other investors in. When it was Asset ManagementPartners only, my wife and four kids were the limited partners. But I wasn’t alimited partner. I was only a general partner in that fund, so it was a third, athird, and the kids together a third. I’ve always heard and known that if you’re a limited partner you couldbecome considered to have liabilities. But now with some outside investors,even though they’re family friends and, as I said, one Indian tribe, we treat itlike any other fund and we have a general partner. I’m both a general partnerand a limited partner in this case. Even in much earlier funds where we hadsome outside people in them, I’ve always been an investor in the generalpartnership beyond just the minimums required. So I’ve never got burned, but with the structure of having some outsidemoney, we just felt we should have a more normal general partnership thatmakes decisions, and I didn’t want to be the only general partner. I’m not surethese guys would go along with that anyway, because they’re professionalsand they want to have their say so.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Then if the decision-making process is more or less like other firms, is thereanything that distinguishes Asset Management from other venture capitalfirms? Johnson: If we make a lot of money, we keep most of it, that’s what! [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That’s a good one! Johnson: We have a carry, a normal carry, that I share with these other guys and withother people in the company here. So the profit sharing is there. But thelimited partners, of which most of the interests are our family, sure—we makea great deal, the money stays home. We pay out some to the other limited partners, and then 20 percent of the profits end up being shared among theother guys in the office, including me. I take a normal share of the profitsharing. It’s called carried interest. You know about that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Okay. How about Asset Management in terms of looking at a potential deal?Is there any set of criteria that you use that might be a little different than whatother firms use? Johnson: Well, we emphasize startups a lot, although plenty of people [do].<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right. Why startups? Johnson: Because when you have smaller amounts of capital and you want to make alot of money, the multiples are higher if you succeed. You’re not as fast andthe IRRs sometimes aren’t any better. But if you can make ten times yourmoney in five years, that happens to be 58 percent IRR on that deal. We calculate returns on three levels. The portfolio return—that’s all themoney going into the portfolio and all the money coming out. The partnershipreturn—all the money that comes into the partnership from any source and allthat goes out. Then you have limited partner returns, which are all the moneythat comes in from the limited partners and all that goes out to them. Themiddle one is not calculated very much, but everybody calculates the portfolioreturn, and some people never talk about much more than that. [It] is higher,because you draw a circle around your portfolio, money goes in, moneycomes out, and that’s the multiple on the return. In the case of the limited partners, you draw a circle around them. All themoney they put in, all the money they get out—that’s the limited partnerreturn. That’s what most people think of from an investment point of view.But there’s also this other level where you draw a circle around the wholepartnership. All the money that goes into the partnership in general, limitedand general, and all the money that comes out to the limiteds and to thegenerals as well.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What about the more subjective side of it, the thrill of being in at thebeginning of a company. Does that at all enter in? Johnson: Yes, oh yes. There’s two things about it from a kind of a thrill side that I love.I like science and technology, so I love doing my homework on some of thesedeals and having those guys explain to me what they’re doing technically. It’sjust interesting. I’m an engineer. I went back and took some biotechnology atStanford after I got out, and I’ve always read about and liked science. I wouldn’t say I understand it at a bench level, but most things people are doingI at least get an idea of what they are doing. I love to talk to scientists aboutwhat they are doing, especially now with the stem cell initiatives and all thosethings that are using modern biotechnology, modern genetics. So that’s thethrill part of it—intellectually, I guess you’d call it. But another thrill part of it is the startup—the getting a company going,creating something where nothing was there before, looking at someone’sdream, usually someone else’s dream, and buying off on that dream andgetting in with them and making it happen. I just got back from the Olympictrials. It’s a little like wandering around the starting block before you get onthe blocks—it’s a very exciting moment. I remember from my own runningdays, you go into a bubble—you don’t hear anything but the starter’scommands. You don’t hear the crowd, you don’t hear anything. You’re just soinside yourself. Now it’s not quite that dramatic, but there’s some of that and that’s where thecompetitive zeal part comes in. Plenty of people have that who’ve never beenathletes by a long ways, but you hit a point that’s a good one. There is anexcitement and a thrill to getting a company going. It’s a slow-motion thrill,because things don’t happen for months. But you sense the desire and drive ofthe men and women running the company, you share in that, and when it doessucceed— When it fails it feels awful. It isn’t just oh okay, we lost a millionbucks. It’s not that easy. You failed.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So there’s an emotional commitment as well as a financial commitment? Johnson: Yes, and you could call that a weakness, too. Don’t fall in love with yourdeals is an old saying, and I probably err on the side of getting too interestedand excited about deals.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Does that mean that you have sometimes stayed in a deal too long or not madechanges soon enough? Johnson: Yes. Craig [C.] Taylor, who worked for me from the 1970s to the 1990s—there were about twenty years, so he obviously was influenced by me a lot,and before him, Brook Byers. Brook never said this, but Craig said, “Youknow, I had to unlearn something. I had to unlearn that you [can] stick with adeal forever.” And he was right about that. I’m a little weak on that, butsometimes it does pay. Sometimes if you just hang in there and work througha tough time like now, the payoff can be great. I really haven’t sat down company by company and reviewed whether Ishould have done something, changed managements, or just dropped out of the deal. Changing managements I’m not that bad. I’m a little slow, butyou’ve really got to give this guy or this woman a chance to succeed if youthink they can. If you don’t think they can, you should have decided that first,or sometimes you make a change pretty fast. I’ve had three or four times I’vejust sat down with guys and said, “I’m sorry. We’re going to have to make achange.” And often they’re guys I know and like even. No one likes to do it,period. It’s an awful thing to do. I’m not as good at recognizing and thendoing it as some other guys are.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you think that is because you’re somewhat clouded by the emotional sideof the investment? Johnson: Yes, probably. It’s probably because I care about the deals. And you can’tcare about the deals, like caring about the people. I don’t know if it’s aweakness—it’s a strength too. It’s a strength because they sense and you sensethat you’re in there to win, and when you change a president, when you asksomeone to step aside, it’s a moment of failure, really. But you’d rather havethe relationship fail than the company fail.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is a management change at the top, probably the crisis for a young company—aside from not having money. Johnson: No. Running out of cash, it gets your attention. The sight of the gallows clearsyour mind. [laughter] I didn’t say that, as you know, somebody said that, butthat’s so true. At a level, it’s crisis. You try to do it before there’s a crisis. Youtry to do it because you see the company heading south, or as they may say inAustralia, north, I don’t know. But we try to make changes and try to justobserve. Sometimes the signals come from inside the company—the peoplethere want a change. That’s happened at least once to me. You can’t not listento that! [chuckling] And sometimes it’s funny, in a way, because people sayfunny things. It’s in anticipation of a crisis you don’t want to face. That’s whatit is. By itself it’s not a crisis, it’s just a decision that the board of directorsmakes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You’ve mentioned a couple of times an Indian tribe. Johnson: Oh, they were called the South Utes. The South Utes are a branch of the oldUtes that lived in Western Colorado and Utah. I can’t give you the dates, butlet’s just say in the 1860s and 70s they were put on some really awful land,like our forefathers did with many Indian tribes, and that land had silver on it.So as soon as that was discovered, they kicked them off of that land and putthem on some even worse land! But that land had oil under it, and by then itwas too late to kick them off!  I forget, I think it was Exxon or somebody who discovered the oil there. Sothen they obviously began to have oil royalties, and it’s a nice story if I have itstraight. It may be myth, but I think it’s true. They had a very wise chiefwho’s called chairman of the tribal council, but he’s basically a chief in anordinary sense. He argued with the Bureau of Indian Affairs and said, “Wedon’t want to pass out all the money to these families every year. We want topass out half the money, so they can live, and then we’re going to invest halffor them.” Extremely wise decision. Well, I can’t give you the numbers, but they have a little under three thousandmembers of the tribe, and they have a few billion dollars of assets now fromhaving investment programs. So we hope we add to that for them. But wewent there to visit them near Durango, Colorado. Interestingly enough, someof the managers of the money are Indian Indians! From India, not AmericanIndians, just a coincidence of name. But there’s a tribal member that looksafter that, a manager, looking after the other Indians who are managing it. Sowe’ve had a good relationship with them. Not a lot of contact. We hope todeliver some really good things back to them.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is this a fairly recent association? Johnson: We call that fund the ’04 Fund, so it was 2004. I don’t think they mind mymentioning it since it’s a public matter, but we report to them every quarter.As I say, we have high hopes for them and us. I don’t know how that came up,because almost all the other limited partners with us now are people whoknew us to start with. One family in particular said—next time we dosomething could we get involved? And so we’ve done that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you’ve had more or less the same limited partners since you started out? Johnson: No, not at all. If you go back a long way in history, we had some universitiesas limited partners. Our firm, some guys left us because they wanted to bemanaging larger amounts of money and managing other people’s money. Thatwas Craig Taylor and some other guys. They left in the late nineties sometimeand formed their own firm called Alloy Ventures with which we’re quitefriendly and communicative. So some of those universities and other limitedpartners we had in an older fund. But I’ve always had this family fund calledAsset Management Partners, which did the investments in Eastern Europe, didthe investments in other venture capital companies, and for a long time wasour venture fund that we had. Only in 2004 did we start another fund that hadthese limited number of limited partners. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, maybe this is the time to talk about the Eastern Europe venture capitalbusiness. Johnson: Sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you early in the game in venture capital in that area? Johnson: Yes. The quick history of that is that Bill Draper, whom you’ve interviewed,and who was my business partner in a very early SBIC in the sixties, becamethe head of the United Nations Development Program—UNDP. And so in1990, when the walls were starting to come down in Eastern Europe andand ’90. He said a few months earlier, “Would you go with me on a trip toPoland, Romania, Bulgaria, Albania, Yugoslavia, and then Czechoslovakiaand just talk to the country leaders about building small businesses andventure capital?” I said yes, but the Polish part I couldn’t do—because I justcouldn’t do it. So I started in Romania, and we met with the heads of state governmentduring the trip. They were not my normal people to deal with but UNDP did.So we went to the last of those countries and made some subsequent visitswhen I was invited to come back, just personally. The UNDP was helping, sothey funded my trips. Then I realized after a while that they didn’t need [me]anymore—I made two or three trips. In fact, in Romania the man who becameprime minister asked me to be his advisor, so I made several trips while hewas prime minister to advise him about these issues—a guy named [Theodor]Stolojan, so I got to know Romania pretty well during those visits.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Had they any form of venture capital before this? Johnson: Well, not in the Communist era, no. [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: No. [chuckling] Johnson: They were lucky if they did not get arrested for selling applies on the streets.That’s not quite fair, but they didn’t have any businesses. I suppose peoplewere bartering and trading. You can’t really stop people from doing businessentirely. There were quite a few government-owned plants and governmentowned businesses. Then I visited the Czech Republic on a trip. Also in an unrelated trip in Juneor maybe July of 1990, I was invited to go to Russia, and I met with the mayor of the city then called Leningrad and gave a bunch of talks there, including tothe city council. That led to, a few years later, my getting involved in aventure fund starting in St. Petersburg. But getting back to this other trip—after about a couple of years of givingadvice, it was obvious that they really needed somebody to start some venturefunds. They had privatization funds, and they had people who were starting tobuy up government-owned companies and run them. Or they also passed outthe stock to lots of people, but venture capital seemed like something theycould use. So what happened was that a guy of Polish origins and three guys of Czechand Slovak origins came to me separately suggesting we start a venture fundthere. So I, without going through all the details, sort of jammed themtogether—unwisely, it turned out. We started a fund based in Warsaw, with anoffice in Prague, which would do deals in both the Czech Republic and Polandand Slovakia, which by then was a separate country. Czechoslovakia split intotwo countries way back in there. I put in some money. A firm called ABN AMRO Bank and EBRP gotinterested and they put in some. Then we had some other investors aroundhere from origins in those countries—Polish or Czech, and it ran along prettywell. The net of it all was that the Polish guy couldn’t get along with the otherguys—I don’t know why, they’re all Slavs, but they couldn’t get along. And itmay have just been more personal than any ethnic differences. BecauseSlovak guys can sort of speak Polish, we took the Slovak guy and put him torun the Warsaw office after the Warsaw guy left, and then brought some morePolish guys in and that worked out fine, that relationship. But the fund—I can’t give you the dates—it just finished up a couple of yearsago and made a few bucks, but it was never really successful. It didn’t losemoney—that’s something. So we paid off all our partners, and there was aslight profit, a very slight profit, so nobody lost. We started another fund, withABN AMRO. We didn’t even try to raise money from these people whohadn’t done anything but get their money back. That fund is now in its fifth orsixth year, I don’t remember, and it’s doing very, very nicely. But ABNAMRO, for reasons unrelated to all of this, has broken up into a series ofbanks and selling itself off in pieces. So they will not be participating, I’msure, in any future funding. Now the guy we brought in from Slovakia died about five years ago, so it’sbeen run by a group of Polish guys. So we’re about fully invested, and it’sdoing very well. Several months from now, they’ll try to pull another fundtogether, and I probably almost certainly would be involved in it again. I don’tknow whether I want to go to Europe four times a year anymore, but that’sanother matter. I like flying my airplane, though, it’s a good way to go.  80 Let me finish that up. The man I’ve been advising, who was the primeminister of Romania, left that job and asked me if I’d be involved in startingan investment bank there, which I did. It was sort of venture capital, and thathas evolved into more of a private equity fund which I’m involved in—apublic one with public shareholders. And then in Russia, I got involved with afund in St. Petersburg, invested in that, and was on the board of advisors there.It’s just wrapping itself up with pretty good success. Then I helped a biotechgroup of companies to win a competition to get some government supportalong with private money to start a new venture fund. But the private moneynever really came around. They won the competition of three out of, I think,about fifteen firms. But whether I want to be involved with that very much, Idon’t know. The private money never came around so the thing’s beenfinanced by some Russian banks and I’m not so sure what my role will bethere in the future. Probably not much. Then I got involved in Norway, which is nothing to do with Eastern Europe,and backed a venture fund there and one in New Zealand. So I’ve helped backother venture funds in the United States, helped them get going, especially inthe biotech area where I’m known. In Romania, Poland, the Czech Republic,Russia, Eastern Europe, New Zealand, and Norway, I’ve helped start funds inwhich I’m involved in each case [or] in descendants of those funds.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: In some of those cases, did you get the venture capital ball rolling, so tospeak? Johnson: Yes, I think so. We were early in—being early in is not necessarily smart. Butwe were very early in Poland and the Czech Republic. The only what I’d callnormal venture fund [was] in Russia for a while.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Your comments bring to mind another general question—the importance, ornot, of the infrastructure, or the geography, or the culture, whatever you wantto all it, in which venture capital is occurring. I’m surmising that a venturecapital enterprise in any of the countries that you mentioned must have beendifferent in some ways than doing one here. Johnson: A lot! [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, can you talk about that? Johnson: Yes, sure. Let me take Poland—the most positive case. Poland was never fullycommunized. They had private farming, a lot of private farming, they hadsmall, private businesses. I think the number was twelve people you couldhave. So it had kind of a running start. So they were sort of ready for the thought of private business, and private businesses got going fast. There weresome already there when we got there. But the emphasis here is on high technology—a group of engineers, a groupof scientists, some graduate students doing something brand-new intechnology. That wasn’t what we were doing at all in Poland. What we weredoing in Poland was helping people start companies where there weren’t anycompanies before. There was very little infrastructure to support them, and sowe created a lot of startups—or backed them. We didn’t create any, webacked some startups, some of which didn’t work. They were in things likehomebuilding and in helping computers be used by companies. One company that did very well took software and hardware from westernsuppliers, put them together, installed them in companies, and got a fee fortraining the people in selling the goods. That worked out very nicely. One wassort of scientific. This guy developed a new kind of a pipette. That’s more likewhat we do here, and that worked out nicely. We backed a pizza manufacturerthat didn’t do well—seemed like it would, but didn’t. We had, oh I can’t evenname them all. There was a kind of a Federal Express type of thing that didokay. We had a couple of software companies that were more like what wewould do here. They were of varying quality. We had one call center thatworked out pretty well for a while, where you’d call in, and we had peopletalking about products, and so we would have people that knew products well.So you’d pick up the phone and say, “I’d like to talk about soap,” orsomething—I don’t know, I probably have the wrong example. But the callcenter was pretty good. It had some problems but eventually succeeded. We did about twenty deals, but very few of them were new kinds oftechnology. Some of them were applying technology to modern business, thatthey didn’t have much there. Some were just creating businesses—liketrucking and transportation—where they didn’t have it before. So that era isover now where you’re trying—those economies are going on. Poland isprobably the most lively country, although Russia would have to beconsidered that too. But it took the Czech Republic and Slovakia longer to getgoing because they were at a dead stop. I’m not sure about this, but I think thebarbers worked for the state.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you had to start at square one with the idea of private enterprise. Johnson: Start at square one with them. A little bit like a relay runner grabbing thebaton from somebody who’s already running, or being in the 100-meters andstarting from the blocks. To the extent we made money in that first fund, itwas just about all made in Poland, and we had some losses in the CzechRepublic. Different guys ran the office so you’ll never know [whether] it wasthe people or the situation. But early on, Poland was by far the best place. Now Russia’s turned out to be lively. It’s a little bit rough and tumbleatmosphere there—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Rough and tumble in terms of the crime element? Johnson: No. We didn’t get influenced by the crime very much. We had littlecompanies with little money, and so there was nothing much of interest to thecrooks. There are crooks there, but we didn’t run into those. Rough andtumble business methods— A lot of it has to do with whom you know andinfluence and government influences and those things. We didn’t run into thecrooks. I’d have been very uncomfortable if we had to deal with them. Iwouldn’t have, actually. One of the entrepreneurs cheated us, but all the other ones we dealt with werereally normal men and women—not many women in Russia I might add—who we made or lost our money. We used a technique in Russia which is anold American technique of buying a lot of stock cheap and then lendingmoney that the entrepreneur doesn’t have. So you got a big loan and a littleequity. This guy—we paid off our loan and then he said, “I’m canceling yourstock. And we said, “Why?” And he said, “Well, because you didn’t give meas much help as you should have.” It was just an excuse for the real value ofthe company. So we took it to court and the court ruled in our favor.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You took it to court there? Johnson: The court there, yes. But the enforcement of the court order has not beenstraightforward. [laughter] So I don’t know what’s going to happen there, butnothing good. The guy was just—I’d call him an ordinary chiseler.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, whom you could run across in any country. Johnson: You could run across anywhere. Russia’s not that big. It’s about 200 millionpeople or something like that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But in geography— Johnson: It’s as big as you can get in geography, but it also has a lot of mineral incomeand resources. A lot of guys bought up government companies cheaply, bywhatever means they did that. I don’t have any firsthand information. So theyhave these billionaires types, and they are not very interested in venturecapital or starting young companies. There’s quite a wealthy group of peoplein Russia. They travel all over Europe—you seem them. There’s people with lots of money there. They buy all kind of airplanes, in their cities they’re bigdeals. And the old retired people live pretty modestly on old pensions. There’sa pretty good sized middle class there, but it’s quite capitalistic. It’s fullycapitalistic now. But they haven’t done what we had hoped in terms of makingsure that the companies that the government sold were sold in private peoplein an open and fully disclosed processes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. Well, let’s stop there. [tape change][End Audio File 5]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: We haven’t specifically talked about venture capital in the Bay Area, and whythis area has been so flourishing and fruitful. Johnson: Well, that’s been looked at by lots of people, scholars included. But I’ve gotmy own thinking. I think the most important single reason is the presence oftwo, now three, great research universities in the area—Stanford, Cal, andUCSF. But also, the presence of other important educational institutions thatprovide a great flow of engineers and people that aren’t scientists, althoughtwo produce engineers. You have San Jose State, a very fine school. SantaClara has a good engineering school and a business school. And so the totaleducational environment here has been very strong, not only in technology—Cal and Stanford have great business schools, along with Santa Clara andHayward—they all have MBA programs. So you have a broad spectrum ofeducated people, all the way from science through marketing and finance. Then the second factor is statewide, but it’s true here. The communitycolleges are an unheralded but extremely important part of our educationalsystem. So you have such heavy-duty training of technicians and technicalpeople, plus people who go back and take accounting, as my wife did, or takebusiness subjects that weren’t part of their undergraduate education. Sonumber one is the educational environment and research which is very strong, Second of all, people like to live here. The climate’s good. I’m going back towhen I was a kid—there weren’t many companies. HP [Hewlett-Packard] andI think Varian was going when I was a little guy. HP got going in the latethirties. But you have an environment where you didn’t have the strictures andstructures of back East. You had a much more open environment here, ingeneral, in the West. And we were independent. They didn’t pay muchattention to us, and we didn’t pay much attention to them back East. So youhad an environment of freedom and lack of having to do things the old way.  It all started with education, but then we had an environment here. FederalRadio got going in 1906, so there’s been a history of a low level ofentrepreneurial activity, and it made this area somewhat different. But thesuccess of HP, the concentration that Dave [Packard] and Bill [Hewlett] hadof building a fine company. I had Bill talk to my class at one point, and hesaid, “We never thought a lot about making money. We knew we’d makemoney. What we really thought about was building a profitable company thatserved the customers well and was a great place to work.” And he reallymeant that. That was an absolutely sincere statement, and they did that. So I think the idea that HP succeeded here spun off a few, but not manypeople who had the ability to work in other companies. Other people wereinspired by the model, so that by about 1958 or so, it was clear that there werelots of technical people, people wanting to start companies, and so the fewcompanies that had made it like Varian, HP, and a couple others, and WatkinsJohnson, some of those were just sort of the natural kind of things thatoccurred here because the people were here. I think people coming through during the war and seeing how great theweather was influenced people to want to live here. But there was very littleventure capital, so that wasn’t part of the success at that point.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But there was military money, the defense industry, particularly in southernCalifornia, right? Johnson: Yes, I’m talking about Silicon Valley at the moment. There were somedefense expenditures here, but the bases here were operational bases. Thesupport of research in the universities by the Defense Department and by thegovernment in general was an important factor of getting intellectualstimulation for both people and for independent ideas scientifically. It waskind of a snowball, an exponential effect with a pretty low exponent on it. Ijust think the people were here, and the environment was such that it becameokay to be an entrepreneur. You could talk about my son the doctor, my sonthe lawyer, but my son the entrepreneur became a good thing to be—or mydaughter. I moved here in 1940 when my father became the Stanford track coach. I hadlived in Des Moines before that, up ‘til twelve. So I early observed almost allof this up until 1950 when I moved away to go back East to school and thenthe air force and then I had a job back East in the steel mills.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right, so you had ten years in California.  Johnson: So I missed the direct observation of that period between 1950 and 1962 whenI moved back again, and that was a very important time. But during that time,a number of companies were started, and a pioneer venture firm called Draper,Gaither and Anderson, started by Bill Draper’s dad and two other men, backedby the Rockefeller family and others, set up offices here and began to makewhat we now think of as venture investments in technology companies. You have a copy of my chart already—you can see some of that history inthere very, very early on. In fact I started the beginning point of my chartin ’58, even though a couple of individuals were before that. So why the success here? Primarily the great educational environment andemphasis on science and technology, b) the lack of structure and freedom totry things and not have to be part of some earlier structure and then, c) just asalient firm like Hewlett-Packard that set the pace and example for everybody.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Would you also put in this mix a culture that is not risk averse, that is willingto try new things and try new things that fail? Johnson: Well, I think that’s true of the United States, but it’s certainly true here, andwe’re certainly influenced by being part of the United States. Now I gavelocal conditions. There are things that are present in our whole country thatenabled us to be part of that. One was, much more than Europeans, we’re tolerant of people trying thingsand failing. Maybe a little more free here than back East, but it’s part of ourculture to make money, lead your own life, not be too dependent on thegovernment, and have an independence from the government. It’s a bigargument we’ll have politically in the next months, I’m sure. Always we’llhave that. But self-reliance is part of the West. We have relatively low taxes. We don’t have the lowest taxes in the world, butwe have taxes where if you make some money you can keep it, some of it, andyou can reinvest it in your company. There are other countries with lowertaxes than we, especially on capital gains, even though our capital gains taxhas been lowered—there are countries that don’t have any capital gains tax.They figure you invest money, you take it out, you want to reinvest it, that’snot taxable. We won’t have that argument, but moderate taxes, an environmentencouraging self-reliance and building your own life and being responsible foryourself is a national trait. De Tocqueville pointed this out very early on.We’ve never lost that characteristic, and we should keep that the best we can. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why do you think that is? The easy answer might be is that the sorts of peoplethat originally came to this country were enterprising and obviously willing totake risks if they were going to go to an unknown continent. Johnson: I’m sure there are sociologists and historians who can tell you a far moreofficial answer, but our ancestors came and left behind them whateverstructure there was, and came to strike out on their own. My own particular ychromosome ancestor was named John Johnson. I know he came in 1635 andsettled in Ipswich, Massachusetts. He was one of the founders of that town. Idon’t know much about him. I know he left England, left something behindhim. He was a carpenter and all that kind of stuff. But he built his own lifethere and up in Andover later. I don’t know much about them, but I’ve lookedat all those generations. They’re just the people that built the country. I’m very proud of them—noneof them were big deals, though. They’re big deals in a town, say, but theyweren’t Cabots and Lodges and all that stuff, who did their job too, by theway. Mine were all farmers, carpenters, one forbearer started a bank inDecatur, Illinois.I’ve never spent that much time on them, but they were justmoving West and building lives and they’re typical— That’s the thing, they’retypical of our country, because they were obviously on their own, and theybuilt their success or lack of it. But getting back to what you said, I think we’re much more tolerant of failureor people being on their own and trying things than they are, say, in Germany,especially where failure, up until lately, has been a very difficult thing.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: These are cultural/social attributes that we’re talking about. Did you find thatwas a barrier when you went into foreign venture capital? Johnson: Well, we were breaking through something different there. We were breakingthrough the end of Socialism. I would say people were anxious in all thosecountries to get out from under the heavy hand of government dependency. Ithink it was a human trait, but there was more concern about failure than youmight think. Venture capital in Western Europe, which I was involved in learning about asthe chairman of the international committee of the National Venture CapitalAssociation, is different, because Eastern European venture capital was morelike American, with startups and people leaving jobs and starting companies.Startups were not as popular or as common in post-war Western Europe asthey were in [Eastern Europe]. But that’s because a lot of Americans like mewere wandering around, and it sort of fit people coming out from underCommunism and Socialism. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Would Boole & Babbage be a good company to talk about in terms of Pitchphilosophies of venture capital? [chuckling] Johnson: Well, yes. [interruption]. In 1967, I think is the right year—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That’s right. Johnson: Draper and Johnson assets had been sold off to Sutter Hill. Bill was workingat Sutter Hill, and I was on my own. A friend of mine in the city, he’s still agood friend, John Bryan, said that he knew a couple guys in Palo Alto that hadstarted a software consulting firm. They had an idea to build software whichwould be sold, or in this case leased, as packages to companies. Up to thatpoint, people with their own computers had to write their own programs—they’re called problem programs. They had operating systems that wereprovided by the supplier, normally IBM then, but they didn’t have programsyou could just drop in and do tasks. Well, Ken [Kenneth W.] Kolence and David Katch were the two guys.Kolence and Katch Audit was their little consulting firm. They thought thatyou could build two kinds of programs for the then-IBM computers that weregoing to be coming on called the 360 series. It was a brand new series. So theyhad one kind of program which would make computers run better and couldlook at and see where other kinds of programs were spending their time andthen give you programs that would help the computer run better to runproblem programs. The other kind was called—that was called—PPE,Problem Program Evaluator. And then the other one was CUE, which wasConfiguration Utilization Evaluator. It helped you have the right number ofdisk drives and put the computer systems together. Well, anyway, it was new because nobody had any kind of products like thatbefore. There was only one other company providing software, packagedsoftware anyway. The idea was you wouldn’t have to write your ownsoftware. You could buy software from others. Well, it’s common now. So toshorten this story down, I got together, myself and John, of course, whobrought the deal in, and Bill Edwards, another friend, and we founded thiscorporation from the Kolence and Katch partnership, and they called it Boole& Babbage—[George] Boole being the first person to create the logic ofsoftware and [Charles] Babbage being the first guy to invent a computer. Infact, there’s a model of his old engine down at the Computer History Museumright now. But we had nothing to do with them other than just to name the company forthem. So it got going and had some success, and we had the usual excitementand problems of a startup. I became chairman of the board pretty early on because I was the primary investor, and I worked with them much in the wayI’ve been describing: trying to give them advice and help, and trying to keeptheir enthusiasm up because it was tough sledding. IBM wasn’t in love with usbecause we were postponing people’s purchases of computers. They didn’tbehave badly, they just—Then another company developed some softwarelike ours and gave it away, but it wasn’t as good. So in the end, we developeda commercial model. The company became successful, ran into some toughsledding—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How long did it take to become successful? Johnson: How do you define that? Start making money?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, how do you define it? [chuckling] Johnson: [chuckling] I probably have the years not quite right, but after about three orfour years it became clear that the men that were managing it, the foundersweren’t really—they were good people, but they— So we brought in a guy—Ithink he sent his resume around—but he was a Harvard Business Schoolgraduate, a guy named Bruce Coleman. Bruce came in and became theexecutive vice president. But then the main founder, Ken Kolence and hedidn’t get along very well. After a while, it became clear that we had to makea change there, so we asked Ken to step aside. I said, “We’ve got to make apitching change.” But we were pretty good friends. He accepted it pretty well,and so we moved ahead. Bruce built a real good company there for quite awhile, then he left to go with a great big company because he got a real goodjob there. We had a couple of other managements, one other management that didn’twork so well. We got a guy name Jack van Kinsbergen who took it public andmade a good success of it. Then he left to do something else, so in the end, webrought in one of our directors to—because it was faltering a little bit. Itwasn’t losing money but it just wasn’t growing. So one of our directors thathad a strong success before coming on our board—Paul [Newton]—did reallywell. We got into network programs to help networks run better. We sold thecompany for just about a billion bucks to BMC after—from 1967 to 1997—thirty years. Talk about patience! [laughing] So you couldn’t do that in aventure fund. You could only do that as an individual investor, which I was.So we made out nicely in the end, and it was a public company. But then thestock went down a lot that we got. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: According to this document, which I got off the web, there was also a crisiswith IBM that left the company with a lot of mainframes that were not— Johnson: They had a bunch of products called 360 and then they had the 370. Weevolved our product line to fit those, and as IBM, as those big mainframesbecame less the main processing source, they became more like big servers.But our real business, in the end, was products to help people managenetworks.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I’ll just read you what this article says and you can, of course, disagree: “Asthe IBM computers on which Boole’s software ran evolved, the company’sproduct line started to become obsolete.” Johnson: We had then seen that and had begun to develop our network products. That’sa correct statement, but they didn’t become obsolete so fast that the businesswas suffering from that. It took us a while to get our network programs going,and then the network programs became important. That’s a correct statement.Needless to say that the company also transferred its attention to networkprograms to avoid the whole company becoming obsolete. It was a slow spot,though, that’s correct.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, and then it goes on: “An ill-advised investment in another softwarecompany made matters worse. By 1980 Boole was teetering on the brink ofbankruptcy.” Johnson: I never felt it was teetering. Who wrote that?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Answers.com. Johnson: Oh. Well, I think if we hadn’t been successful in the field of networkmanagement, I think we might have gone broke because our business wasdropping off in our other products. Teetering—what’s teetering, okay? Wecould have gone broke if we hadn’t done something, sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I’m not trying to poke holes in the history of this company. Johnson: Why not?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] Okay, I will. But I think it does illustrate another point—that youare willing to stick with things longer, somewhat because of your personality  90and your loyalty to the people involved, but also because you have greatercontrol. Johnson: Well, yes, I felt that we could make a success of the company. Bruce left for abig job somewhere else. The guy that took his place couldn’t do it. And thenJack van Kinsbergen did come in and built us into the network business. Idon’t know all the dates, but Jack took us public and then we had plenty ofmoney then and we weren’t teetering on bankruptcy. But before we wentpublic, and before we bought Jack in, I would say we might have been able tosee the handwriting on the wall, but we were doing something about it. Now the chairman of the board is a mysterious job, whether it’s an operacompany or a real company, because the company is run by other people. Butyou try to exert influence and give advice and be a cheerleader. You help leadthe decisions as to who’s going to be the management, and I didn’t make avery good choice after Bruce left.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You take responsibility for that? Johnson: Well, the board has too, and the board looked to me as their leader, and I wasthe one that suggested recruiting these other guys. I could have done a betterjob of that. I think I suggested them to the board. The board approved it, but Iwasn’t a dictator. They were letting me lead the way on who the managementought to be now. But I was right about Bruce, I was right about letting thoseother guys go, wrong about these other two guys, then I was right about Jackvan Kinsbergen, and I was right about Paul Newton.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Not a bad record.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Are there two ways of exiting? IPOs and acquisition? Johnson: Well, there’s a third way called liquidation.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Okay. [chuckling] Johnson: It isn’t too prosperous, you see, but if you have a company with lots of liquidassets, you could just pass out all the assets to people. But basically, take itpublic. Then two things happen when you go public, the investors usuallydon’t get any money out because you don’t have a secondary. Secondarymeans shares already issued being sold in the offering, so it’s usually just aprimary offering and that money all goes in the company. But then youestablish a public market for the stock, and after a decent waiting period defined by the agreement, thirty days, or ninety days, or 120 days, then youcan begin to sell your stock into the market. Now sometimes there’s asecondary component to an IPO in which you sell some of your stock as wellas the company sells stock. Not common. So the company gets money togrow, the investors get some money out of it at that point, or they can if theywant to by selling it in the market. The second thing—mergers—some kinds of acquisitions you get a lot of cash.In the case of the BMC they gave us BMC stock for our Boole and Babbagestock, and they took over the company and merged it into BMC and we gotBMC stock. A couple of years after the merger, the stock went down a lotthough, just in the marketplace. We always told ourselves, we got a billiondollars for the company, but we didn’t really. But it felt good to say that! Paul Newton and I have stayed friends over the years, and we keep track ofhim. He made, as he should have,some good money from that few years hespent there. But Boole was a good example of a company that became thirtyyears old that never really succeeded greatly, went through some growingpains—could have had better guidance from me. But we eventually made itwith patience, and with going public we felt pretty good. I could have soldout, sold my stock when it was public and got off the board, but I didn’t. I juststuck with it, and it was kind of a career—a thirty-year career for me. Itwasn’t a job I got paid for, but it was my job as a venture capitalist to lookafter it. It was a pretty good example of a company that didn’t fail and didpretty well, but didn’t become a big deal.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And also illustrative of your willingness to stick with things<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is there any inherent virtue in an IPO over acquisition? Johnson: Well, it keeps the company alive, and it can fulfill some larger growth aims.Normally you’re acquired by a bigger company, so that the growth may belike that [indicating upward movement] and when you’re acquired it goes likethis [indicating downward movement]. If you’re not acquired and you keepbeing successful, the growth rate can continue. So when you’re acquired,normally that’s the end of your substantial growth in your investment. Sothat’s the disadvantage, but it’s more risk—and sometimes they give you cash,so that’s really it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And then in terms of the company itself often the culture becomes that of theacquiring company, right? Johnson: Usually. Boole and Babbage disappeared inside of BMC. What they call ourproduct called PATROL is one of their major projects. It was a very good acquisition for them. I think it’s gone up slightly in value, not from when weacquired it, but after the dip it’s doing okay. I’m happy with it. We did theright thing.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: One of the big worries at the time that Roche acquired Genentech in 1990 waswould the enterprising culture be destroyed? Johnson: They didn’t acquire it, for one thing, they acquired 60 percent of it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Okay, they acquired 60 percent. Johnson: It wasn’t folded into Merck—Merck deliberately kept it separate.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Into Roche. Johnson: I mean Roche. [Art] Levinson, the president, is a very independent guy. I’msure that Roche is on the board and gets reports and all that stuff. But I thinkGenentech runs itself. It’s a good company and it has good people in it. I don’tknow the Roche environment, but it is not instilled in or injected intoGenentech.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Can you give Roche some credit for that? Johnson: Yes, I do. They didn’t try to subsume it. I wouldn’t say they left it aloneeither, but they just said, “Okay, we own a majority and you’re not going todo stuff we don’t want to do.” But I don’t know firsthand but I’m sure therehave been some times when Roche said, “We’d prefer you not do that,” or“Don’t develop that drug.” I bet because Art Levinson is such a good leaderand a good scientist that they leave him alone as long as he’s making goodmoney. Now, if their growth rate stopped and if Avastin had some bigproblems and things slowed down, the growth rate stopped, then they mightstart trying to be more influential. But since I’m not on the scene up there, Ihave no idea what the relationship is.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, but it does bring up the question about the small startup entrepreneurialcompany in terms of culture as opposed to the big, established corporations.Can you ever get a Genentech or an Amgen at a Merk? Johnson: No. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why? Johnson: You can hypothetically do it. You could set up a division, back it, and say,“You guys got your company. We’re not going to interfere.” I can see themencouraging people, incentivizing people, and encouraging them to beresponsible for their own division—and that happens. But it’s not like havingyour own company where you’re independent, [only] dependent on yourself,and the benefits of what you do accrue to your own employees and yourshareholders.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What has been your observation over the years about the entrepreneur as anindividual? I’m thinking of the corporation/startup dichotomy. Johnson: I guess I don’t understand the question. Do you mean how do I viewentrepreneurs? Why are they different from people that work in companies?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, that’s a better way of saying it. Johnson: Well, I think they treasure and love the independence. They love their feelingof being self-reliant, or a group bring self-reliant. They know that if they workhard and are right, in the end they’ll make some good money, which iscertainly a primary aim. But they also can live with uncertainty, they can livewith risk—they can sleep. I know people that can’t be in little companies—itjust makes them too nervous. And they’re not good or bad people, they’re justpeople. So you have to be able to sleep when you have no idea what’s goingto happen to you.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Don’t you have to put yourself in that same category? Johnson: Yes. Venture capitalists all learn how to sleep when things are going to hell.[laughter] George Quist said it best—a friend of mine who was a founder ofHambrecht and Quist. He said that venture capitalists sleep like babies—theysleep for an hour and they cry for an hour! [laughter] But I sleep fine. I’ve hadnights when I’ve been happier than other nights, when I was worried aboutsomething, but I really have been able to get off to sleep and get a night’ssleep almost always.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you think if you had been financially dependent on the investment wouldhave made a difference? Or is it just your personality to do your best andthat’s it?  Johnson: I don’t know. No one would call me low strung—they haven’t anyway. Butwhen Draper and I first started out, we had no idea if we were going tosucceed or fail. This is in the early sixties. I had a wife and four kids, a newfamily. I’ve always been able to cope with the risk even though it wasunresolved. But one night I never slept was a weird one. I was in Rome at the RomeOlympics and Russia—we were ahead of Russia in the final basketball gamewith a point, or something. Russia got the ball out of bounds after our lastwinning basket, and the guy stepped on the line and threw the ball all the waydown the court, and the Russian forward dunked the ball in for the winningbucket. And the ref didn’t call that foul, and I was so hepped up, troubled, Iwas furious. The American team was all—it was Munich, I’m sorry. It wasnot Rome, it was Munich. I couldn’t sleep. I got home and Cathie said—“Just calm down, it’s just a [game].” I said, “It’snot just a game, it’s the Olympic final.” [chuckling] I usually just go to thetrack meet. I don’t always go for the basketball. I love basketball. Nowadaysit’s hard to get in basketball and swimming and other stuff I like. But I alwaysjust go for the track and field, called “athletics” in the Olympics. But it wassuch a bad call; it was an obvious illegal pass when you put your foot on theline and you threw it in. The American team was really furious. They did abad thing—they didn’t show up for the medal ceremony, which I thought wasbad sportsmanship, even if they were justified. But I slept very little that night.I slept better than that after many other difficulties. [laughing]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, your sporting background has been a theme through the talk. Johnson: Yes, I’m a son of a track coach and my dad was an Olympic athlete and allthat. I like winning.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But you also seem to believe in teamwork. Johnson: Well, I’m a track athlete, so except on relay teams and when you’re scoring indual meets, I’m not a teamwork guy like a basketball team or a football team.I fooled around with those sports in high school, but I’m basically anindividual athlete.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I guess that analogy doesn’t work. Johnson: But I felt very much a part of a team, because we used to have somethingcalled dual meets where you’d score a couple of points and then you’d be Stanford against Cal and all that stuff. They still have that meet, but that’sabout all. So we had a team feeling, certainly a relay team you have thatfeeling. But I recognize teamwork, I like teamwork, but I also understandindividual contributors and how important they are as well.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You do seem to think that the venture capital industry is not just a question offinances or investment, it’s a question of involvement from the get go. Johnson: Oh yes. You can hardly find one venture capitalist who’ll say it’s a financialbusiness. I don’t think you’ve found many who’ve said that, because there’sso much more to it. If it was a financial business, I’d make the investmentsand I’d go play golf every day. I don’t do that. I should, though! [chuckling] .<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, we’re running out of time, so maybe we should move to your role in thetwo venture capital associations. Johnson: I would guess about 1958 or 1959, someone started the Western Associationof Small Business Investment Companies, WASBIC. When Draper and Istarted our firm, in 1962, let’s say it was a year before it was started—therewere twelve members. There were only twelve SBICs and we met for dinneronce a month.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Twelve in the whole— Johnson: In the whole Bay Area. Johnson: So we had twelve members. There may have been other ones that didn’t join,but it was a small number. Less than half were doing what you’d call venturecapital. The rest were real estate and stuff like that. But we’d all have dinneronce a month together in the City and talk about things and what we weredoing, and it was very easy to get in somebody else’s deal or somebody get inyour deal. We all knew each other. It was just a small group. In 1965 I was the president-elect of the Western Association of SmallBusiness Investment Companies, but at that point Draper and I sold our SBIC,which we had formed in 1962, to Sutter Hill, and it was one of the origins ofSutter Hill’s background, as you already know. So then I wasn’t a smallbusiness investment company owner anymore, so I couldn’t be in WASBIC.The Western Association of Venture Capitalists started sometime after 1965,having evolved from WASBIC. I became involved in that, became a director,and I was president for a term—after one year as program director. They make you be program director before you can be president so you get all thespeakers.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were they both mainly promotional organizations? Johnson: No. The WASBIC was just talk among ourselves about our problems ofgetting going. It was like any group that doesn’t know what they’re doing.They’re just trying to talk to each other and see if somebody knowssomething. National Association of Venture Capitalists was very clearlystarted to give us a forum to talk to each other, but [also] to deal with thefederal government on issues of taxes and regulation.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you lobby? Johnson: We lobbied a lot, sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And to what effect? Johnson: Well, you call it lobbying, but we were trying to explain to congressmen andto committees and to the press that the creation of small businesses— A studyhad come out of MIT about 1979 by a guy named [David L.] Birch thatshowed that all the net new jobs in the United States came from companiesless than ten years old. The big companies grew and the big companiesshrank, but the net new jobs— I’ll bet it’s true now, and I’ll bet it’s beenalways true. The Depression, that’d be a different matter. So we had thatinformation. We convinced a certain number of senators— We’d have dinner with them ormeet with them, and I did some of that myself, and convinced them that lowercapital gains taxes, or treating them differently from ordinary income, peoplecould invest money, take a risk, gain and then take it out and then reinvest it,that that was not the same thing as a salary.There’s a big argument going on about that now, actually, for a differentreason. Carried interest is treated as a capital gain and some congressmen aresaying, “Well, it’s compensation, it’s not a capital gain.” And this is not theforum for that one. There was an important area where pension funds couldn’tinvest in venture funds, because the trustees could have been held responsiblefor any failure within the venture fund. I don’t remember the year, but—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: 1978.  Johnson: Seventy-eight. That does sound right to me. We got that legislation changed,and I think I was on the board of NVCA, at that point. No, I think I was on theboard after that. I think NVCA had an influence, but not with me on the board.But they did change the regulations so that it made it possible, basically, forpension funds to invest in venture capital firms without being consideredreckless, because of the total exposure to many deals.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And that opened up a huge— Johnson: That opened up a huge amount of capital for venture capital firms.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Te early eighties were a boom time for venture capital. Johnson: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you credit the ERISA [Employee Retirement Income Security] Act— Wasthat an element? Johnson: Yes, it was. The ERISA Act opened up a lot of coffers for venture capital.Venture capital had a hard time getting noticed for a while. I remember acartoon in the late sixties in the New Yorker, where there was a couple ofprosperous-looking guys sitting in a club and one way saying, “Venturecapital—whatever happened to venture capital?” [laughter] And then Iremember students in my class saying, or one student in particular said, “It’sjust an anomaly. It can’t exist. It’s from a discontinuity in the marketplace.”So we had that discussion in class. I can’t give you the right dates, but WASBIC was my first affiliation in theearly sixties. Then in the seventies I think the next thing was the WesternAssociation of Venture Capitalists. I’m pretty sure I was president of that for awhile. And then I can’t tell you when, but let’s just say late seventies ormaybe early eighties I got involved as a director of the National VentureCapital Association and became the chairman of the international committee,[on] which I had a lot to do with building relationships with other venturecapital associations in Europe in particular. So that was that. You wanted to cover my class? You said you wanted to cover that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I want you to talk about your class, yes.  Johnson: Okay. So being a son of an English teacher and a coach, I’ve always thoughtabout being a teacher. I never did, but in 1979, or was it ’78 when it first cameup? A friend of mine had been teaching a course in entrepreneurship atStanford Business School, Greg [Gregor G.] Peterson. He was a Sutter Hillguy, by the way. He left to do something else; and they needed someone totake over his class in fairly short order. So he asked me if I’d go over thereand interview the associate dean. Of course, I was sort of fascinated by thethought of it. So in 1979, I accepted it, and I became something called a lecturer inmanagement. It was a paid job. I took the pay—it wasn’t all that much, but itwas 15 percent of an assistant professor’s pay, because I wanted to have therelationship, one of not being a volunteer. Somebody was hiring, and if theydidn’t like me they could fire me—and they didn’t. So I took the pay and Istarted off. The first year I just used some canned cases. Then I began to usebusiness plans from our own files here as examples.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Had you gotten that idea from Harvard Business School? Johnson: The case study, yes I had, from going there. But Stanford was a case-studyschool. I never thought about not using the case system. So I never thoughtabout having a bunch of lectures. The next year I built a curriculum mostly ofcases from our own files, and then I asked the entrepreneur in each case tocome to class at the end of the discussion to comment on the discussion. Butfrom pretty early on, because I was a venture capitalist, I told the students thatif they’d like to not treat it like they’re an entrepreneur but treat it like they’reventure capitalists and pass judgments on the deals and whatever they’d liketo do—the MBA candidates all love to pass judgment on things. So a lot ofthem took up that option. Then after about three or four years, another guy named Irv [Harold Irving]Grousbeck came from Harvard. He came as a lecturer on management. Hetaught the course differently and put all his emphasis on the entrepreneurialside of it, and I was putting all of mine on venture capital. So the studentswanted to take both courses. They didn’t like the explanation,“You can’t takeboth because they have the same number.” So I changed the name of mycourse from Formation of New Ventures [to] Entrepreneurship and VentureCapital, and I gave it a new number of Business 353, I think it was. So thenthat became a venture capital course, and it was the first venture capital coursetaught in any business school that I know of.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What year would that have been?  Johnson: Well, you know, it really began almost as soon as I began to teach. Let meguess, 1984 or 1985. I started teaching in ’79. From ’84 on it was a venturecapital course. I did the same things, but I’d bring in the entrepreneurs whowould then have heard the discussion. I taught one course per year of eighteento twenty sessions, and it was a popular course.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did teaching all that time and interacting with bright minds change anythinking on your part? Johnson: [pause] I’ll tell you what it did, it gave me a feeling that I should write a fewthings and I should talk about— It certainly led to my going to Eastern Europein 1990, because I was thought of as a partly academic person. So when BillDraper organized the trip, they began to treat me as if I knew somethinginstead of just being a practitioner. Being a professor is a really big deal inEurope. Here it’s respected, but it’s not like a class apart. So I was calledprofessor and all that stuff. They called me professor at Stanford, but really we weren’t technically—ourjob was not professor. We weren’t in the tenure track. The other thing I likedabout it was, I and the other practitioners who were teaching real estate andother things, who were doers, were treated extremely cordially andrespectfully by the rest [of the faculty]. They’d be in faculty meetings, they’dask our opinion and we’d speak up and people would listen.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you think that that has something to do with Stanford’s culture? Since thetimes of Terman, Stanford has been known to reach out to the businesscommunity. Johnson: I don’t know that. I think Stanford had an entrepreneurial course for a longtime. My contribution was making it into a venture capital course. You askedme about exposure to bright minds. I’m eighty now, so in 1979 I would havebeen fifty-one, so I was not a spring chicken, by any means. I taught allthrough my fifties and I was sixty-three when I quit. I think being with youngpeople, hearing new ways of looking at things, hearing how they view theirown ambitions and view things is always refreshing. I’m involved with brightminds every day around here and around my companies, so that isn’t [it] asmuch as being involved with young people who have new ways of doingthings, think new things, being exposed to the fact that the old way has tochange. Since I’m exposed to bright minds all the time, I don’t think that wasthe experience. The experience was in young, bright minds that was good forme.  100 It opened up so many things—it opened the Eastern European trips. Bill mighthave taken me anyway, but he could advertise me as a semi-academic. Andthen I taught for a couple of summers in Berlin—for one week in anotherperson’s course in Berlin. There they wanted lectures. They could barely bringthemselves to participate in a discussion like that. I’ve written some things,and one thing Hoover [Institution] published. So that whole academic side—whether it helped my venture capital career, I can’t tell you, but it sure madean interesting facet of my life.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did it open up business opportunities? Johnson: Well, because the students had to write business plans, I always passed themoff to other people. I didn’t want to be in the position of grading a guy’s paperand then sitting down with him a few months later and negotiating a deal. So Ipassed along to other people some things that did become real companies. I’venever backed a deal from a student. Then after I stopped teaching my class in1990, I usually take one or two students a quarter who want to write businessplans under my tutelage who hear about me or something, and I’ve had somefun with that. One woman, who twenty years ago I was her advisor, started a venture firm inBarcelona, so another guy and I are going to get involved in that as investors.But I don’t feel the slightest [hesitation]— That’s too old to worry about.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Your reputation from the few people that I’ve had the privilege to talk to sofar is that you are an extremely ethical man. Johnson: That’s my self-picture, yes. I’m glad some other people think that too! Let mesay this—the venture business was ethical from the beginning. With the guysand the women that founded the business, there’s never been the slightestsense of you couldn’t shake hands on something, or that someone wouldmislead you and not tell you something that you needed to know. I was onlyan example of a custom and a way of doing business in the venture capitalbusiness from the early days.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. But I think you were projecting a certain set of ethics too. Johnson: Well, yes. I contributed to it and I took from it. But I could name half a dozenother guys that I think of as quite ethical. I didn’t run into any problems. Nowin the boom times of the late nineties, some sidewinders did come in that wereso anxious to make money in a hurry that they cut some corners that the oldguard wouldn’t have cut. But I think all old guys say that! [chuckling] <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, Pitch, thank you very much for your time. Johnson: It’s been fun for me, yes! 
Interviewer: All right. It’s June 8, 2010, and we’re in the office of W.R. Hambrecht on PierOne in San Francisco. I’m talking with W.R. Hambrecht, William Hambrecht.Let’s start with your family of origin and your early education and how youeventually got into what you’re doing now. Hambrecht: Okay. Well, I was brought up on the South Shore of Long Island. My familywas from Brooklyn and the South Shore of Long Island. My dad Henry W.Hambrecht was with Mobil Oil Company. Socony [Standard Oil Company ofNew York], I guess it was called at that time. And I grew up in a typicalmiddle-class town and environment, became very interested in athletics as akid, and ended up going to Princeton, effectively on a football scholarship. Igraduated from Princeton in 1957.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: In history, I notice. Hambrecht: History major, that’s correct. Went into the army for six months on an ROTCprogram and went back to New York and got a job on Wall Street as a parttime thing before I went off to business school.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why were you oriented towards business school? Hambrecht: My dad and my uncles, everybody was in some form of business, and I grewup assuming I’d have to work for a living. [chuckling] There were a fairnumber of people who worked on Wall Street that lived in thisBrooklyn/South Shore of Long Island kind of thing. So I was exposed to it asa kid. I always thought it was kind of intriguing. I never quite understood whatmade a market work, but it was interesting to try and figure it out—anddecided that I would try and go to business school. I was supposed to go off toWharton in the fall, and I’d gotten very interested in the marketplace. A close friend of mine, Dennis Delafield from college, who had also been inthe army with me down at [Fort] Benning, had gone down to Florida to join aninvestment firm that his uncle had started years ago. And he kept in touchwith me and said, “Hey, why don’t you come on down and take a look at this,and let’s do it together.” So I decided, rather than go back to business school, Iwould go down to Florida and join Dennis in his small firm. It was in centralFlorida, and I was, in effect, assigned the east coast of central Florida, whichwas Cape Canaveral, which was the start of the technology world. So I spentthree years down there, helped finance three or four of the early digitaltechnology companies that had sprung up around Cape Canaveral. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Could you call this venture capital that you were doing? Hambrecht: No. Well, yes and no. There were a couple of private placements. It was alsotaking some of these smaller companies public, doing some IPO work. So itwas a combination of private and public. And then our firm was acquired by aChicago firm, and they moved me back to Chicago. Then that firm wasacquired by a New York firm, the F.I. du Pont Company, and so I ended up inNew York. During that time I had built a portfolio of investments in some ofthese digital companies, for the firms I was with. Then one of them, ModularComputer, worked out very well—no, it wasn’t Module—SystemsEngineering Labs was the first one. And I developed a reputation, in theory, ofunderstanding the early computer business. I would be the first to admit I stilldon’t understand the science, but I did make some wonderful friendships andcontacts in Florida with some of the early scientific people that had developedthe whole missile program.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So this was your graduate education in technology and in finance, was it not? Hambrecht: Well, that’s true, although when I was in Chicago I did go to the University ofChicago business school at night.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, you did. Hambrecht: I didn’t finish because I got merged out of Chicago, but I did get somefinancial training there which was very good.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: A history major, I would think, would not be the immediate background forwhat you were doing. Hambrecht: No, no. But the whole scientific development around the missile program Ithought was fascinating. I met some really interesting people. Several of thembecame real mentors, almost through my whole life, and I was just veryfortunate to be exposed to that kind of program and those kind of people.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were they looking upon you as something unusual as well in what you weretrying to do? Or was this rather an established way of financing at that time? Hambrecht: Well, you see, everything was so new. And it was very clear that Wall Streetdidn’t understand, really, what was happening. Nor did they particularly wantto, because it was very small. These companies were half a dozen people getting together. Wall Street, particularly in the fifties, was quite conservative.The premium was always on the very large, established companies. Therewere very few early-stage investors. Rockefeller was probably the first and thebest, but there really weren’t many. So it was probably inadvertent, but yes, Iwas there really to learn what the technology people were doing and then seeif I could relate it to Wall Street and find them some money. I was basically afundraiser, which I’ve been all my life! [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was the technology the original hook? What got you captivated? Hambrecht: Well, yes. The first computers were built down there to track the missiles, andthere was a little company called Soroban Engineering that was started byCharlie [Charles F.] West. Charlie had actually been at Berkeley as a studentand then at MIT, and he was one of the five or six scientists the governmentselected and sent down to Florida to try and develop the missile program.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And this is late fifties? Hambrecht: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That seems really early to me. Hambrecht: And early sixties. Oh yes, it was very early. The first computer I ever saw hadall the vacuum tubes, and it used to run for about a minute, and then it wouldcrash. [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did it fill a room? Hambrecht: Oh yes! It was huge. And I remember Charlie’s role was to develop theperipherals that would feed in and out of the computer. So he developed thefirst paper tape punch and that type of thing.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You didn’t have any specific technical background. Hambrecht: No.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But you could get enough of it to do what you needed to do? Because I wouldthink at some level you had to assess the technology, at least at a superficiallevel.  Hambrecht: You know, I’ve often tried to think—okay, did I really understand it or didn’tI? And I think somehow or other, intuitively, it all sort of made sense to me. Itwas very logical that if you could do things in this kind of sequence, youwould be doing them faster and better, and it would lead to somethingproductive. I never quite understood the physics, although it was explained tome a lot. But I was fortunate in being able to see concrete examples, and if Ihadn’t seen those I’m sure I wouldn’t have gotten excited about it. But yes, Iultimately saw how you could move data. You could collect it; you couldanalyze it; you could make things better with it. So yes, I think I probablyunderstood the application of it reasonably well because I had some very goodteachers. I had really good mentors.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, that’s what was going through my mind. You were impressed also withthe people. Hambrecht: Oh absolutely. Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Does that become a theme? Hambrecht: Oh sure. The most of the early pioneers in technology were for the most partout of the academic environment initially. They were very focused. Of course,they were very bright, but also very charismatic in their way. It was hard notto get excited about it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I can imagine just from the way you’re describing it. Okay. So then the firm’sbought up, and you’re essentially out of a job. Hambrecht: I was in New York, and I was there to help integrate the firms. Once that wasover, yes, they offered me the San Francisco office of du Pont, on the idea thatSilicon Valley was starting—that I could go out and help develop the bankingbusiness on the Peninsula.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Had the office already been established? Hambrecht: Oh yes. They’d been here a long time.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So were they early on in recognizing the potential of Silicon Valley, whichwasn’t even called Silicon Valley at that point?  Hambrecht: To be honest, no. I think it was more just trying to find an excuse to get meout of New York! [laughter] Find a place for me. And du Pont, at that timewas the third largest brokerage firm in the country, and the Allyn family, whohad been the first acquirers, they were the ones that were willing to invest inventure stuff. But the du Ponts were never really—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So this is the du Ponts of the du Pont de Nemours? Hambrecht: Yes, in theory it was too bad, because they were one of the first of the venturecapitalists. They put up the money to start General Motors. But they weremuch more conservative in their investment stance when I got there. And ofcourse, they were very much focused on chemicals and heavy industry andwere not oriented towards the technology.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So when did you arrive on the West Coast? Hambrecht: In 1965.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And what did you find? Hambrecht: Well, first we had a brokerage office out here that I had to sort through, whichI did. But then, oh, I just quickly gravitated down towards the Peninsula. Thefirst company I remember calling on was Farinon Electric, Bill [William B.]Farinon. He had been actually a roommate of John Allyn in college back East,and so I followed up on that. He had a small telephone equipment suppliercompany. We ultimately made an investment there, and I got to know some ofthe people who were in the telephone equipment business, and then that drewme towards the original Fairchild [Semiconductor] group where people likeBob [Robert N.] Noyce and the rest of them broke out.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And you invested there as well? Hambrecht: We had a small investment in Intel, yes. Unfortunately, we didn’t have muchmoney, so it wasn’t a big one. It was small.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But you’re doing venture capital, aren’t you? Hambrecht: Well, when I got to San Francisco, after I started digging around and seeingwhat was out here, I ran into George Quist. George had been one of the earlyentrepreneurs out here in San Francisco. He had started a company—or I guess he had been put into a company called Mandrel Industries, which was aelectronic sorting-machine company that had merged into Ampex. He got toknow Henry McMicking, who was, I think, the largest shareholder of Ampexat that point. So anyway, when this company was sold to Ampex, Georgedidn’t have anything to do, so he joined the Bank of America, and they starteda Small Business Investment Company, and he started investing with thebank’s SBIC. I got together with him, and we kind of saw eye to eye on howto do it, and we went out and did a few things together.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And he had been here longer, right? Hambrecht: Oh right. He was a native.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So he had some connections that maybe you didn’t? Hambrecht: He had all the connections in San Francisco, yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did he have a different way of looking at investment? Or were you prettymuch in sync? Hambrecht: No, he was actually an accountant by training.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was he! Hambrecht: Yes, and was a very sound business guy, just understood balance sheets verywell. It was a really good grounding. Never was really, terribly comfortablewith some of the technology, because so much of the assets in technology arenot financial.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, and were you feeling comfortable, or more comfortable anyway, with thetechnology? Hambrecht: Well, yes, I had realized at least in the seven years or so before in some of theinvestments I made that your intellectual assets were really the real assets, andthey don’t get carried on a balance sheet, or at least weren’t at that point. So Ithink we made a good mix. He grounded me pretty much financially, and Ithink I drove him more towards the technology. But it was a good mix.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What was happening in the Valley at that point?  Hambrecht: Very little. The major technology centers were Hewlett-Packard, of course,Sylvania—they were some of the big government contractors. Very few smallcompanies.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And no venture capital partnerships yet, are there? Hambrecht: Not really. Well, I don’t know when exactly Sutter Hill started.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That was a little bit later. Draper, Gaither & Anderson is ’68-’69, somethinglike that. There were people doing what we now call venture capital, but in avery personal way. Hambrecht: Well, for example, when we started Hambrecht & Quist at the end of 1967,we went to Henry McMicking, who was probably the most well-knownventure guy because of Ampex; Prentis [C.] Hale who had investedaggressively in a lot of this; John Bryan, who had been with Blyth and thenstarted a specialty of investing in some of these companies; Bill Edwards—sothey were just starting. Arthur Rock had just come out. Intel was started in, Ibelieve it was, May of 1968. That was the exact month that Hambrecht &Quist got started. I really always thought that that was what really started it,when they broke out of Fairchild and set up Intel. That put in motion a kind ofa pattern that went way beyond our wildest dreams.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right, that other people began to mimic. They opened the door to possibilities. Hambrecht: Right, right. So it was really the late sixties. Arthur Rock had been involved inone of the smaller computer companies, too, SDS [Scientific Data Systems], Ithink it was, before Intel. But he was the one who, I think, raised the mostmoney for Intel. He was out of New York, I think, at that time, and then hejust came out to the West Coast.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So what are the ingredients here? There’s technology burgeoning, but you’realso showing that big money can be made. Or is it big yet? Hambrecht: It wasn’t big, and that’s why I left to start Hambrecht & Quist with George,because I could never get anybody in New York interested in small offerings.The first offering we did at Hambrecht & Quist was Spectra-Physics.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh really!  Hambrecht: Yes, they were the leading laser company. It was a $600,000 offering. And noone wanted to bother. No one wanted to bother.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Too small. Hambrecht: It was just too small. And the Intels of the world didn’t have the physicalassets that would attract a conventional investor. Virtually, it was verydifficult to get anybody interested in those kind of things.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why did you think you could do it? Hambrecht: Well, when we started Hambrecht & Quist, we really felt that we had to bringsomething else to the party to get accepted into the group, so to speak. Andbecause I’d had experience in public offerings, we went out to the venturecapital guys and said, “Look, we have a venture capital fund here; we’re goingto invest some money. When we get to know these companies we’ll be able tobring them public for you.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. And they didn’t know how to do that? Hambrecht: They didn’t know how to do that, and the big firms didn’t want to do it. Andthere was really only one firm in New York, [C.E.] Unterberg, Towbin thatused to do that back there. And we said, “Hey, we’ll do it for you here.” Andnobody ever asked me, “Well, why do you think you could do it?” We justsaid we could! [laughter] And we went out and we found out by doing someof these—yes, there was a market for it. So that was really how we developedthe business. It was more to be included in the venture capital community thanany other reason.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Hambrecht & Quist was both a venture capital firm and an investmentbanking firm. Hambrecht: It was, yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Are you looking at those two aspects as very synergistic? Because at one levelI see those two things as possibly in conflict. Hambrecht: Well, actually, when we started, we did integrate both venture capital andinvestment banking. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: From the start. Hambrecht: From the start. For example, in Spectra-Physics, which we brought public, wehad actually made an investment in the company the year before. And yes,there were a lot of people that thought that might be a conflict of interest. Ourtheory was that, number one, if you lived with a company before you tookthem public, your odds of having good companies to take public improved,because you’d live with them for a while, you knew what you were dealingwith, and you got a feel for their technology and how good they were.Secondly, small companies were not very attractive financings from aneconomical point of view. But if we were a shareholder, and we could benefitas a shareholder, we thought, okay, that would be a good business model. Andas it turned out, if you go back for the thirty years H&Q was in the business,about 40 percent of the profits came from the venture and 60 percent frominvestment banking. And the great companies that we underwrote, Genentech,Apple, Netscape—all of those—we were shareholders when they wereprivate.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that a criterion for your participation? Hambrecht: We started out that way, but we didn’t have enough money to do it all thetime. And then the underwriting business developed a business of its own, andwe had investment bankers join the firm. So ultimately it became more of anindependent business than it was in the beginning.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now, were you the first to do that? To combine those two entities? Hambrecht: Pretty much so, yes. Steve [Steven N.] Machtinger ended up as counsel forHambrecht & Quist for many, many years. Steve was a young lawyer with theSEC [Securities & Exchange] office in San Francisco, and he spent a yearinvestigating us, trying to decide whether this was really a conflict of interestor not! [laughter] And he finally decided it wasn’t and then ultimately becameour counsel.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Which some people could have looked at as a conflict of interest right there! Hambrecht: Well, maybe, but he was confident.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, that’s interesting isn’t it? One thing was feeding another, wasn’t it?  Hambrecht: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: The money that you were making as a shareholder then fueled your venturecapital? Hambrecht: Well, it made a business model that was much more attractive, and we couldattract capital, and we could build the firm, yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You said you had experience in taking companies public, beginning inFlorida, right? But I’m imagining that there was a steep learning curve whenthis really became a major part of your business. I only have a vague idea ofthe intricacies of taking a company public, but I know it’s no easy thing:figuring out what the SEC requires and then getting the company itself in line. Hambrecht: Well, I never thought that there was very much to that, to be honest.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh really? Hambrecht: To me the trick in being an IPO underwriter is the judgment call of who doyou take public.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Okay, well, please talk about that. Hambrecht: Both George and I were not technology based. We were both, in effect,financial. And so the first person we hired, I remember, was a physics major,John Chulick from [Admiral Hyman G.] Rickover’s submarine program. Hisjob was to sort out the technology for us and try and identify what we thoughtwere the most promising technologies, and then the most promisingcompanies within those technologies. So that’s what we did very differently, Ithink, for the first twelve years we were in business. We basically hadengineers instead of financial people. And it gave us a great advantage forquite a while until Wall Street caught on, and then they started hiring all theirpeople from IBM. But it lasted, really, through the early eighties.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And then what changed? Hambrecht: Well, in 1980, up until then we had done smaller technology companies. We’dbuilt a nice firm; we were making a nice living. But then we had made aninvestment in Apple Computer and in Genentech. And in 1980, in a ninetyday period, those two companies went public, and we were the co-manager of both. In the case of Apple, it was the first time Morgan Stanley had ever comanaged with anybody.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Really! Wasn’t there a lead underwriter in Genentech? Hambrecht: It was Paine Webber.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Paine Webber, that’s right. Hambrecht: Paine Webber was the co-manager of Genentech. And we had owned sharesin both companies. We were the co-manager. I remember Fortune magazinethen wrote an article, and Fortune at that time was enormously influential, andI remember they titled it “The Folks Who Brought You Apple.” And that’swhat changed us from kind of a local, little firm into all of a sudden we wereraising money in Europe and life was beautiful. So—but that changed it verydramatically and propelled the investment banking business to the front of thefirm rather than the venture.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I know something about the Genentech IPO. I interviewed [Robert] Swanson,luckily while he was still well. And of course, as you probably remember, thatwas a precedent-setting IPO. Hambrecht: Oh yes, yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you go on the road trip? Hambrecht: Yes. I was with Bob through the whole thing.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Can you tell me some of your memories of how that went? Hambrecht: Well, first of all, being an investor in Genentech as we were— I guess wewent in it in 1976, so this was four years [later]. I remember George Quistkidding me when we first made the investment that Watson & Crick soundedlike a vaudeville team. Nobody really understood what Herb [Herbert W.]Boyer and Bob were saying. But Bob had a way of making it veryunderstandable.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: He was a good translator.  Hambrecht: He was a very good translator. And he would put it in terms that a nontechnology person could understand what they were driving at. And so by thetime we went public, I was pretty familiar with everything that Bob and Herbwere doing, so I was pretty comfortable with it. The memories of it, though,that come back hard— Well, first of all, just some of the funny personal stuff.I’m trying to remember, somebody—was it Bob and Judy?—might almostmade a honeymoon out of it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: They did. The IPO was delayed. There had been an extension of the quietperiod because the SEC was worried about some publicity. Bob apparentlythought he had planned his wedding date so that the IPO would be completelyover. [Hambrecht laughs] Uh-uh. [laughter] So he told a very funny story ofSnow White and the Seven Dwarfs. Snow White was his wife and then he hadall these dwarfs— Hambrecht: Well, I was one of the seven dwarfs!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: --trailing around on their honeymoon! Hambrecht: Well, I remember being one of the seven dwarfs, along with Tom Perkins.Tom and I were there. It was fun. I remember some really funny, wonderfulevenings in Scotland and London. After the pricing, we went to New York,and Paine Webber was a very conservative, very good firm. I forget exactlyhow we arrived at the pricing. It was around $30 or $35. Was it $35?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It ended up being $35. Initially shares were priced from $25 to $30, I think,and then they realized how great the demand was. Hambrecht: Well, they did and they didn’t. They were scared to death of it, because Iremember they were just agonizing over whether they could go up to $35, youknow.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Paine Webber was? Hambrecht: Yes, yes. And so we had the long negotiation about gee, could we really do itat that price, and would it fall apart? And then it opened [on the stockexchange] at $85. I remembered thinking—hey, those guys don’t knowanything more about the market than I do! [chuckling] They were just beingconservative; they didn’t understand what was happening.  And to me what had happened with Genentech— When we first made theinvestment, we had a small venture capital fund funded primarily in Europe.One of the shareholders was the Firmenich Company, which was a very large,private Swiss company that made essence of perfume, a very high-endspecialty chemical company. And Robert Firmenich, who was the chairman,took a liking to our fund, and he used to come to the meetings. He used toscare me to death, but he was really smart. I used to try and prepare because Iknew he’d ask the questions. I went in, and I started explaining Genentechwhen we did it, and he said, “Hey, wait a second.” He just jumped on it andunderstood it so much better than I did, and immediately. They made aninvestment in it later and did very, very well.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did he have a background in biology? Hambrecht: Yes. And so to me what that said is, hey, the industry knew a lot more about itthan the financial people. And that was, I think, what happened in the IPO.They were smart people that figured out this was a really fundamentalrevolution, and that this was something very special. The financial peoplewere so used to looking at earning and balance sheets and everything. Andyou know, Genentech didn’t have a dime of revenue. It was zero revenue.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It didn’t have any products. And that was a new thing for investors, was itnot? Hambrecht: Oh yes. And I still remember the road show, where Bob was basically notpromising, but telling people, we thought we’d have insulin within a year, ayear and a half. It took four years [to market]. I remember when it was overBob sat me down and said, “You know, you’re going to have to help me tryand figure out—this is going to take a long time—how do we keep peopleinterested in this company?” And he did a great job. He really did. He alwayshad the enthusiasm; he communicated well. And so nobody ever lost faithwith Bob, even though it took longer. I thought he did a great job.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you think in his secret moments he had doubts? Hambrecht: Probably. We all did! [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But he certainly didn’t let it out even to you. Hambrecht: He didn’t let it out; he didn’t let it out. No, I’m sure he always believed in it.But look, it was a long, arduous process, and it didn’t happen overnight. Theyvery much earned their success, I think. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you go on to invest in other biology-based companies? Hambrecht: Yes. I guess we invested in Biogen and two or three others. And then theanalyst at Paine Webber, a fellow by the name of David [H.] MacCallum thatI had gotten to know on the offering, I thought was very smart and verybright. So we induced him to join Hambrecht & Quist, and he basicallydeveloped the Hambrecht & Quist healthcare group.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Ah, I see. So when would that have been? Hambrecht: In the early eighties. David did a great job, brought on some very brightpeople.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: When you saw a need for expertise in a certain area, you just hired it? Hambrecht: Well, we really looked for partners. How shall I put it? I think both Georgeand I realized that there were things that he and I didn’t really understand, andif we could find the right people to become partners with us, that would reallyhelp us enormously, because it was clear that you needed more than afinancial knowledge in these companies. You had to make judgments basedon science, on people, and the numbers were the last thing you looked at.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right. Which, I would think was very different than the way the East Coastwas operating. Hambrecht: Absolutely.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: First of all, they probably were not heavily invested in technology to beginwith. But it was all pretty much a financial game, wasn’t it, as far as they wereconcerned? Hambrecht: Oh yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So again you were doing something new, weren’t you? Hambrecht: Yes. I still remember the epiphany I had on that. It was before we startedHambrecht & Quist, and it was with Farinon Electric. I went out to to see Billmillion in revenue and were profitable, but it was a small, little company. His father-in-law, who had put up the money— I don’t know whether he neededsome money or they had to get some liquidity. John Allyn, his old collegeroommate, was a partner of DuPont, so they sent me down, and he said, “CanI go public?” And I remember saying [to Bill], “Look, to go public you haveto have five years of earnings; you have to have $1 million of after-taxearnings;” you’ve got to have this, you’ve got to have that. I gave him the fouror five guidelines that we used on Wall Street. And he looked at me, and hesaid, “Who set up those rules?” [laughter] I said, “I don’t know. They’re justthe rules. I don’t know.” And he jumped at me, and he said, “Look, thosegoddamn rules. They were set up for you guys! So you could make a lot ofmoney. They have nothing to do with me. How about looking at this from mypoint of view. I want my company to stay independent. I need some money.”Then on the way out, as I walked out the door, and of course he blistered meon the way out, he finally looked at me and he said, “Do you think I have agood company here?” And I said, “Oh yes. I think you really do.” And hesaid, “Would you put in some of your own money?” And I said, “Absolutely,I would love to buy stock.” And he looked at me and he said, “If you’rewilling to buy stock for yourself, why aren’t you willing to sell it to thepublic?” And that became the credo of Hambrecht & Quist. If we were willingto put up our own [personal] money, well, then be willing to sell it to thepublic. It’s still not a bad rule.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I’m imagining that after Genentech and Apple, two big hits, one right afteranother—Genentech went public in October 1980 and Apple in December.And as you’ve said, then Hambrecht & Quist was on everybody’s mind. Wereyou expanding at a rapid rate at that point? Hambrecht: We did. And too quickly. We had a small organization. I think we hadseventy-five people in the firm when this all happened. And probably threequarters of them were non-professional process type—so very few people.The opportunity was to underwrite anybody. We thought we were maintainingour quality screen, but we really didn’t.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because you just couldn’t spend the time? Hambrecht: Well, we should have but we didn’t. You know you go through a period likethat and you start believing your own press clippings a little bit, and webrought in some new people who we didn’t have a lot of experience. So wemade some decisions that brought us back to earth pretty quickly. By the mideighties we were sort of like the other guys. But we were still there, and westill had a good firm, and we’d learned a lot, and I think we’d startedrecovering. I think the eighties, where we were really fortunate, was we werevery early on software. A couple of people—David [C.] Evans, who was a real mentor to me, who had been the head of Computer Science at Berkeleyand then at Utah, Ben Wegbreit who came out from MIT—they both realizedthe future was going to be in software and that the hardware business wasgoing to become a commodity.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. And they were telling you that? Hambrecht: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And these were just acquaintances? Hambrecht: Well, no. I was on Dave’s board, Evans & Sutherland.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you had insider knowledge. Hambrecht: And I was an investor in Convergent [Technologies], which was Ben’scompany. And then when that sold out, Ben joined us as a partner. So webecame real partners.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So networking is a big part of this, isn’t it, these interpersonal connections? Hambrecht: Oh sure. Well, Dave Evans, for example—his postdoc group. John Warnock,who started Adobe, was a postdoc with Dave. Jim Clark; Jim was a postdoc.Many of the guys with Steve Jobs in Pixar, they all came out of there. Yes,you’ll find common heritage or bonds for a lot of these people. I was just reminded of it, looking at a story the other day. The first softwarecompany to go public was Cullinet, and Hambrecht & Quist brought thempublic in about the mid-eighties, ’85, ’86, something like that. We startedAdobe in ’82, Sybase, Mercury, AOL. We were start-up investor in a lot ofthose. So even though we weren’t nearly as hot publicly, and we looked morelike a conventional firm, probably the best investments we made were in thepost-Apple era where we invested heavily in software. And then the first placeI ever heard the word Internet was at Adobe, and so that ultimately led toNetscape and a bunch of other Internet things.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You were making mistakes, but you were still doing all right. [chuckling]  Hambrecht: Actually, privately, we were doing a lot better than probably the worldthought. And we didn’t really realize how well until the nineties when thebubble happened.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you still the company to come to when a tech company wanted to gopublic? Hambrecht: Well, by then Robertson [Stephens] had developed as a competitor.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that fierce? Hambrecht: We got along pretty well. Sandy [Robertson] and I always were reasonablyfriendly. Competitive but friendly, and we did a number of things together.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Who else was out there? Hambrecht: Montgomery Securities. They were a little more competitive. But they were alittle more different; they were more trading oriented, looking at the biggercompanies. Alex Brown [& Sons] and Unterberg were still out there. So yes,there were four or five firms.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But there was enough business that you weren’t really worried about yourcompetitors? Hambrecht: We managed to keep our share or better. Part of it was the relationship we hadwith Morgan Stanley. We had been the first person to co-manage with them.We had a very special relationship there because one of my closest friends, aguy I went to college with, was Dick [Richard B.] Fisher, who ended uprunning Morgan Stanley. So we had a very special relationship lasting up untilthe day Dick retired in the mid-nineties. That helped—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: If you were going to penetrate that East Coast mentality, it would be veryhelpful to have a friend who had faith in you. But another question alongthose lines is, is East Coast mentality changing? They’re seeing this thinghappening out West— Hambrecht: Sure. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: --that is obviously being very successful, making money, bringing newtechnology to the public. How can they ignore that? Hambrecht: Well, it was interesting. Dick and I were good friends, and he was just verysupportive throughout the whole thing, but he was also very smart and a toughguy. First of all, when we sort of sprang to prominence after the Apple andGenentech thing, all the investment bankers from the East Coast showed upand said, “Okay. We want to work with you.” And I’d say, “Well, whatcompanies are you interested in?” And they’d all start with the biggest. Andwhen I asked Dick, he started with the best technical companies. So I thought,boy, he’s figured it out already. Somehow or other they sorted it out, and theytargeted on the really good technology companies.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: He had enough pull that he could pull his whole company along with him? Hambrecht: He actually took over Morgan Stanley in 1982.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That’s handy for you! [chuckling] Hambrecht: Oh yes. Well, the Apple deal would have never happened without him. Hewas the one who did the Apple deal. He was extraordinarily important. But hewas smart about it, and we had a fifty-fifty deal, which of course all thosepeople hated because Morgan Stanley never went fifty-fifty with anybody. Hetold me later, he said, “Look, sure I wanted to help, and we have a goodrelation, and I wanted to keep it going, but I also thought that almost all thecompanies we were going to underwrite probably would never really needmoney again.” Which is true. The Apples, the Adobes—those companiesnever needed money again, so they weren’t particularly good investmentbanking clients. And what he said was, “You know, what they’re really goingto do is they’re going to create a lot of wealth. And we have a good system ofmanaging wealth.” And he knew we didn’t. So he said, “Okay, we’ll do fiftyfifty in the underwriting, and we’ll get all the other business.” And that’sexactly what happened.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So everybody was happy. Hambrecht: Everybody was happy. We probably should have figured that out too, but wedidn’t.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It worked out.  Hambrecht: It worked out. Well, look, I’d never second guess my relationship with Dick.He was wonderful.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, you were fortunate there, weren’t you. Hambrecht: Oh yes. Very.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What is Hambrecht & Quist consisting of in the eighties? I read about tradingfloors and all of that. Were you large enough to have that kind of thing goingon? Hambrecht: We were an active market maker in the companies that we underwrote, andthat became a very important part of our business.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I don’t really understand what that means. Hambrecht: Well, in the eighties and the nineties, when companies went public, they werenormally initially traded in the NASDAQ market. And the NASDAQ marketis a dealer market. It’s not a specialist exchange market; it wasn’t then. Sothere would be us and maybe another half-dozen firms competing in acomputerized system, but to make a market. And what that says is you offer abid and an offer, so that there’s always a continuous market. And that becamea very profitable business for us, and we continued that up until when the firmwas finally sold to Chase [Manhattan Corporation].<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that an obvious way of going? Hambrecht: Well, first of all it was thought to be a responsibility of the underwriterinitially.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Who? You mean the people who were coming to you? Hambrecht: In other words, if you brought a company public, then you took on theobligation to make a market in the aftermarket. Now the reality was it was soprofitable that other firms figured it out and said okay! [laughter] So it becamecompetitive. And then rather than an obligation, it became a very nice part ofthe business.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But Hambrecht & Quist was the first to do that? 20 Hambrecht: No. Well, there were always dealer shops, but I think we were probably one ofthe first of the specialty underwriters to realize that gee, this is a goodbusiness. And so that generated the revenue where we could build up ourresearch department and reach out and build up the services.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: None of which you had in the beginning? Hambrecht: Very little.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So it was really Hambrecht & Quist going out and using their networkingskills and their other skills. Hambrecht: In the research department when the Apple and Genentech deal came along, ifI remember correctly, I think we had one corporate finance banker, and wehad five analysts. But the five analysts worked on deals, which again isfrowned on now. But it was the idea that if you’re going to bring a companypublic and it’s a software company, you probably want to have a softwareengineer explain it to somebody. So we had a couple of software engineersthere; we had people with different backgrounds, but they were technologybased people. And then after that, we started hiring more financially orientedanalysts, more Wall Street types, and also more bankers, to deal with the—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you’re getting a little bit closer to the East Coast counterparts.or ’82.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And was that kind of inevitable? Hambrecht: Looking back I think, yes, if you’re going to run a business to optimize itsprofitability and its scale, yes, probably. I didn’t like it as well.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, I’ll bet you didn’t. It’s not as exciting, is it? [laughing] Hambrecht: I needed both models. I didn’t think we were doing as high-quality work aswe did in the beginning. In the beginning we could be more selective. Wedidn’t have an overhead we had to cover every day, so we could kind of sitback and wait. Business-model pressures force you into more of a day-to-daybusiness. Look, we tried to keep certain principles intact, and we had some really good people. A lot of good people joined us. It was a good firm. Ithought Hambrecht & Quist was a very good firm. But it changed.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I’m not a business historian, but I have thought about how success itselfbrings problems, in a certain way. Hambrecht: Oh yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I’m thinking of the start-up firm with that culture that is so much talked about,that is so difficult to preserve when you become big and hopefully successful. Hambrecht: Right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It seems to me that something kind of similar is going on. You’re forced tochange from what made you great in the beginning. Hambrecht: Yes. Even if you try and fight it, you do change, because you do have to bringin more people; you bring in a bigger mix of talents, and it’s different.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But it also means that people like you who were there in the beginning for areason, because that’s what you were good at and probably found exciting,maybe had more problems later on. Hambrecht: Yes. Well, that’s why I ultimately went back to the same model which I usedat Hambrecht & Quist.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Shall we talk about that? Are we there? Hambrecht: Sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Let me ask you a few more words about venture capital before we leaveHambrecht & Quist. Your curriculum vitae says that you became directlyinvolved in the venture capital business in the 1970s, very soon after youcame out west. And I presume you mean as Hambrecht & Quist, right? Hambrecht: As Hambrecht & Quist.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: By the early seventies there are people that are doing what we would now callventure capital. I’m thinking of Kleiner & Perkins and Sutter Hill and Draper, Gaither [& Anderson]. Is there any sort of resentment that here you, aninvestment banking firm, are getting involved in their territory? Was theresome tension between you and the people who were just venture capitalists? Hambrecht: Maybe a little. Not the guys who were really there in the beginning becausewe all sort of started at the same time. For example, like Tom Perkins. Weknew Tom because when he was at Hewlett-Packard he’d made an investmentin a little laser company. And we helped merge them into Spectra-Physics andworked with Tom on it. As a matter of fact, we asked Tom to join our firm torun the venture capital! [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh really! Hambrecht: And he got together with Gene Kleiner, and they decided to do it themselves.But we always had, I think, a really good relationship with Tom and Gene. Sowith those people, no. But yes, maybe [some resentment by other venturecapitalists]. But we were co-investors with a fair number of some of the earlyKleiner stuff. I think where we actually became more independent as venturecapitalists was when we essentially made our bet on software. I think we wereearly there, and so no one was really fighting us. I remember the first Adobedeal. We really had trouble putting it together.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Really, because people just didn’t— Hambrecht: People just didn’t know. And at that point the Apples and the hardwarecompanies, the Digital Equipments, and the peripheral disk drive companies,they were the ones that had everyone’s attention.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you think because you had a slightly different background and outlookthan the venture capital partnerships per se that you might look at a deal withslightly different eyes? Hambrecht: I don’t think so. I think it was just having a couple of technology people thatwere a little ahead of the curve, to be honest.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you were on a level playing field. Hambrecht: It was all a level playing field, and I think Dave Evans and Ben Wegbreit anda couple of those guys were just ahead of the curve. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: To drive home a point: all this is totally contingent on having venture capitalavailable. Is it not? To get these companies up and going and financed so thatthey get to a point where they can even consider becoming a public company. Hambrecht: That’s correct, yes. Less so today than it used to be, because again, softwareand the Internet changed everything. I forget how much Apple raised, but itwas quite a bit of money before they got public. And the typicalsemiconductor company that got started in those days would take $30, $40,$50 million, which doesn’t sound like a lot now. But you know, we startedAdobe with $2 million, and we only used $1.2 million of it. And the puresoftware or intellectual property companies that have been so successful insoftware and on the Internet really don’t need much money, so there’s more ofan angel culture out there now. Google didn’t really get any venture moneyuntil they were well on the way. They were basically funded by individualsdown at Stanford, and once the product was up then they brought in Kleinerand Sequoia. And that’s kind of the pattern you see a lot now, because youdon’t need the big money. Of course, most of the venture funds that have beensuccessful have raised a lot of money, so they have to put a lot of money towork.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Which is a problem in itself, isn’t it? Hambrecht: Very much so, very much so, I think.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, anything you want to say about that pre-W.R. Hambrecht & Companyperiod? Hambrecht: No, other than it was a very fortunate and wonderful experience in that I thinkit was an opportunity to try out some new ideas; it was an opportunity to tryand be a little different. And I think the reality of it is we rode the wave. Iwish I could have honestly told you we saw the wave coming, but at least wegot on the top of it for a while and rode it! [laughing]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you have any personal life at this time? Hambrecht: Oh yes. Oh sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You could put all this within some boundaries?  Hambrecht: Look, I was very different personally than my partner George Quist. He was avery flamboyant, very unusual guy. But I think one of the things that broughtus together was we didn’t take each other too seriously, and we enjoyed life.He had a family, and he loved to go out, and he loved to play golf, and heloved to do a lot of things, and so did I. So our culture was never the 4:30 inthe morning till midnight kind of stuff. We just never did that, and we spentweekends at home. I had five kids and a great wife Sally [Sarah P.Hambrecht]. She became part of it and liked to travel with me and do some ofthis stuff. So yes.I early in the game decided in this business sooner or later you’re judged onresults, and the results are almost always conditioned by your judgment andnot appearing to work harder than anybody else. I find in this business it’sgood to take time away and keep a little bit of distance between some of thesethings so that you can think them through.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How did you get that mentality? I can imagine in the whirl of Silicon Valleyculture that it wouldn’t be that difficult to get caught up. Hambrecht: Well, some of the intense software development cycles people get caught upin. But I find the Valley has a nice way of life. A lot of people develop verynice balanced lives down there. I don’t think it’s like a law firm in New Yorkor a Goldman Sachs kind of environment. I don’t think it’s that way at all.[End Audio File 1]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: In 1998 you sold Hambrecht & Quist? Hambrecht: No, I left Hambrecht & Quist in 1998. The firm was sold in 1999 to Chase.What happened was in late ’87, early ’88 I think it was, Merrill Lynch came inand made an offer to buy Hambrecht & Quist. At that point I had steppeddown as co-CEO. I had been CEO, then co-CEO with Dan [Daniel H.] Case[III], and then I believe in ’87 or so I stepped back and became chairman andDan was CEO, a very brilliant, very bright guy. He had been with us forever,and he was really great. Merrill Lynch came in, and I think Dan had decidedthat for us to really succeed as we had before, we had to team up withsomebody with a big balance sheet and a big structure. And he was capable ofrunning a big firm. He was really a strong manager. I wasn’t. I didn’t want to.So he was oriented very much to doing the Merrill Lynch thing. It was at this point that I had come to the conclusion that instead of mergingwith somebody, we should try and do it differently. The patterns that had developed in the IPO business and in the investment business—I just wasn’tcomfortable with a lot of it. And so I said, “Hey, we do have to change. Butlet’s differentiate ourselves by doing it differently as opposed to linking upwith someone.” But I also said, “Hey, it’s really your call with the rest of thepartners. I’ll do whatever everybody else agrees on.” So they got to the point with Merrill Lynch where there was a deal on thetable, and at the last minute I sort of became an issue because they wanted tosign me up along with everybody else, and I just didn’t want to do it. I said I’llbe fine with the sale but I’m going to move on. And then the deal fell apart forother reasons. So I went to Dan and said, “I probably shouldn’t be here now.You’re going to go in this direction; it’s going to happen; I don’t want to be anissue.” I wanted to start this smaller firm to go back to doing some of thethings that I like to do, and I wanted to try an auction and a few other things,so it was agreed that I would leave. I kept my shares. It was very friendly andeverything, at least initially. And then when we started doing some deals thathe liked, then it got a little more competitive. But it was done in the spirit of apartnership. And then a year later they did make a deal to sell to Chase.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And this merging was happening to others? Hambrecht: Oh yes, we were the last one. Yes, Robertson sold out, Unterberg had, AlexBrown had, Montgomery had. Everybody’d sold out.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why was it all of a sudden important to be big? Hambrecht: Well, that was my point. You know, I didn’t think a balance sheet meantanything in the IPO market. It really doesn’t. You don’t need a lot of capital.What the bigger firms do is they say that they can use their balance sheet tohelp these companies finance, and they do in some of the bigger companies,like in buyouts or mergers and acquisitions, where someone has to go in andbuy a piece of stock or put up money in front of a bank to get a bank to put aloan together. Yes, then it works. But mergers and acquisitions were almostno part of the technology world. The great companies grew organically; theydidn’t acquire anybody. So in our business I didn’t think it mattered. In themore conventional business it mattered a lot. And Dan was attracted to themore conventional business. If Dan had lived, he was capable of building andgrowing a large, diversified investment bank. So he was, like so many otherpeople that succeed a founder, his ambitions were broader, which is perfectlynatural. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But you had something that you wanted to do. Had you been thinking aboutthis other idea all along? Or were you forced into thinking, okay, I’m notgoing to be here at Hambrecht & Quist. What am I going to do? Hambrecht: Well, no. Originally when I first came to Dan and said, “You know, I reallythink we should go back to doing the small technology-based deals that wedid in the beginning. We’re all caught up in the big stuff.” What we did is weset up a subsidiary of Hambrecht & Quist to do smaller offerings. Dan namedit RVR, Risk Versus Reward. The idea was we were going to beat theChristensen game. Are you familiar with Clay [Clayton M.] Christensen’swork?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, only from what I’ve read on your Website. [chuckling] Hambrecht: Disruption? Well, he’s a fascinating guy. He, I guess as a postdoc, took up thequestion of why did the three most successful and admired technologycompanies in America, namely AT&T, IBM, and Digital Equipment— Theyhad the best technology; they had the best balance sheets; they hired the bestengineers, and were generally accredited to be the best-managed companies inAmerica. Why were all three brought to the verge of bankruptcy by newtechnologies? And his theory is that every now and then someone comes upwith a business model that’s dramatically different, usually empowered bytechnology, but there has to be a dramatically different business model.The numbers I use, Clay doesn’t exactly agree, but basically you’ve got todevelop a business that gives the customer about 80 percent of what he wantsfor 20 percent or less of the cost. That’s the kind of business model that theincumbent can’t adjust to; he just can’t bring his costs down. And even if hecan, philosophically he won’t, and he’ll move up market, and he’ll leave themarket to you. And that’s what happened to every one of them. And so mytheory was, why don’t we do the same thing in the underwriting market?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You’d read, or had you encountered Christensen? Hambrecht: I’d read his The Innovator’s Dilemma, and so forth, and then actually got toknow him, and he actually joined our board at W.R. Hambrecht.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You were impressed!  Hambrecht: Yes, yes. Because I remember when I first read the book I thought, yes,intuitively that’s what I always thought had happened. I just had never thoughtit through to the point of being able to articulate it that way.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Put it in so many words. Hambrecht: Put it in those terms and make it so clear. Because I remember we started bothAdobe and Sybase, almost in the same month, in 1982. And they were bothvery successful, but they turned out very differently. Adobe is still just asdisruptive because they basically disrupted the printing industry. Sybase hadvery good technology. Most people thought they had better technology thanAdobe, but they had to compete with Larry Ellison at Oracle, and even thoughthey had a better product, Larry could keep adjusting. So Sybase built a decentbusiness because they never really had the dramatic difference in businessmodel.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It’s that term disruptive technology which Christensen’s changed todestructive innovation? Hambrecht: Disruptive innovation or disruptive business model is really what it is.Well, as I said, to me it made a lot of sense, and we developed our model atW.R. Hambrecht on that basis. And it has been a lot harder than I thought itwould be, because first of all, the IPO market has not been very good for thelast seven or eight years, so it has been a hard place to get any real traction.But secondly, we probably should have targeted a different market, becausethere’s something cultural about going public. It’s almost like a graduation ora wedding or something that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: For a company, it is, isn’t it! Hambrecht: Yes, it is. And so people don’t deal with the economics of it the same waythey would any other business transaction. And they don’t really care about ituntil it’s all over. And what we found was countless people that came backlater and said, “Gee, I wish we’d done it your way!” [chuckling] Brand is soimportant, and boy the idea of Goldman Sachs being your underwriter, wow.And of course, Hambrecht & Quist—that’s what we built our business on, areputation that said, “Oh boy. This is the Good Housekeeping Seal ofApproval kind of thing. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, go back step by step and say how you did build this new company. Whowas there aside from you? Did you take some of the people from Hambrecht& Quist? Hambrecht: No, and the few I did was a mistake because it was so dramatically different,and it became very clear that anybody who’d been really with Hambrecht &Quist loved it and said why do it different? “Look at all the money we made,look at how successful we were.” The firm sold for $1.3 billion. Everybodywants to replicate the H&Q model, and this was very different.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How exactly did you put in material form this disruptive innovation businessmodel? Hambrecht: Well, we started with a small group of people, a couple of young people that Iknew that were intrigued with the idea of doing it different, hired my chieftechnology officer Alan Katz from Texas Instruments, because we had done ajoint venture with him at Hambrecht & Quist that had done very, very well,and I thought he was just one of the smartest guys I’d run into. And so, wesaid, okay, let’s do this different. You know what technology’s out there; let’sapply it differently. He was great. We went out there. I think we had a dozen people when we did our firstoffering, using the Internet to distribute and going out through Fidelity.Fidelity became an investor, a few other people, so we used everyone else’sdistribution. The original premise was that if we couldn’t figure out how to dosomething dramatically better with technology, don’t change it, just dosomething else, and focus all our energy and efforts on what we felt we couldbe doing. So we originally focused our efforts on the auction process. It tookabout a year. Most of it was dealing with the SEC, to develop a rule set thatthey were willing to live with. We patented it, which was very fortunate.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was the SEC initially skeptical? Hambrecht: I wouldn’t say skeptical. They were very careful about it because they wantedto make sure it wasn’t a system that could be gamed. But I think over a periodof time the SEC has been very constructive with us. It basically bringstransparency and economic benefit, and what it really does is it takes away thepower of allocation from the underwriter. And that’s at the very heart of anunderwriter’s leverage, the idea that he can either give you shares or not giveyou shares that are typically underpriced. I remember reading in one of thehistory books how J.D. Rockefeller used to get mad at J.P. Morgan because henever thought he got the proper allocation for the offering. [laughter] And Ithought, boy, they were playing the game even back then! <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: The older system is hardly democratic, is it? Hambrecht: Oh no. It’s basically an insider’s game, totally. And the underwriter keeps allthat leverage as they price it so advantageously so that their customer areessentially guaranteed a profit on the first day.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And H&Q was doing the same thing probably. Hambrecht: Sure, absolutely. I could take you through the whole history of it. Initially Ithink traditionally the idea of discounting a public offering, in other words,selling it at a price a little bit below where you thought the market was goingto open, was really a good thing, because what it did was you started out as awinner. For example, when we were doing our early deals at H&Q, if you solda deal to a mutual fund at say $10, and the stock went to $12 or $13, and youcame back to the market a year later to raise more money, they were morethan happy to put more money in because you were a winner in their portfolio.And you know, they’re in the business of advertising winners. If you were aloser, they’d sell you and stay out. So that’s really why it developed that way. Well, what happened in the nineties was, as it became clear or it was reallyclear that there would always be a discount, the big commission generators,like the big mutual funds, monetized it. So essentially what happened is that ifyou delivered a ten-point premium in the marketplace—let’s say you sold amillion shares of a company at $10 and it went to $20 (and that’s what washappening in the nineties on)—you were creating $10 million of aftermarketprofit for the buyers. That stock was placed with the big commissiongenerators, and what was happening was anywhere from a third to a half ofthat dollar amount came back to the managing underwriter that week incommission flow. It’s basically a kickback. So to me, that was a process thathad been taken over by the agenda of the underwriter. The underwriter’sagenda said, how do I get maximum profitability for me out of this system?And it did not place the stock with the right long-term players.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It was a money game, wasn’t it. Hambrecht: It was a money game. It was purely and simply a money game. So that’s whyI wanted to try it differently. We tried at Hambrecht & Quist to discipline thebuyers. If we knew somebody was flipping it the next day, we wouldn’t putthem in the next deal. It was a mess. You could never do it. The institutionshad too much buying power. So that’s when I decided the only way you couldever change it is in a totally new firm. 30<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, please explain how the auction system works. Hambrecht: Well, it’s called a Dutch auction. It’s not really. I remember going to theflower market in Amsterdam one time, and I think I probably misunderstoodwhat they were telling me, because ultimately it was Sergey Brin [Google cofounder] who said, “Hey, that’s not a Dutch auction. It’s a descending priceauction.” And what it is, is if you want to sell a million shares, everybodybids; you start with the highest bid, and you count down the number of sharestill you get to the last share you want to sell, to the millionth share. And theprice that that millionth share is bid becomes the clearing price for the wholeauction. So anybody who bid that price or higher gets the stock. Anybody whobid below that gets nothing. And of course, that’s what the bankers hatebecause they can no longer allocate to their best customers.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Where do the fees come in? Hambrecht: Well, we basically get paid a commission for selling the offering.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: At the same rate that you did at Hambrecht & Quist? Hambrecht: No, because we use electronic distribution, our costs are so much lower, weactually do it at lower spreads. So for example Google, when they wentpublic—the traditional spread is 7 percent, a 7 percent commission, which ispercent, and because we bid 2 percent, they negotiated 2.86 with everyoneelse. Well, for a big deal our fee will generally be 1.5 to 2 percent; for asmaller it may go as high as 3. But hey, that’s plenty of commission. Thatworks.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I read, though, that Google in the end didn’t go entirely with the auctionsystem. What was the story there? Hambrecht: Well, they did. No, they did. The compromise with Google was that two bulgefirms ran the process.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now, why? Hambrecht: Because this was the biggest, most sought after deal in fifty years, and theycouldn’t very well give it to a dinky little firm like ours, although I wish theyhad! [laughter] Eric Schmidt just wrote a really interesting article for the Harvard Business Review on the Google offering—five years later, five-yearanniversary. And we both think that Google didn’t get the optimum price, butGoogle didn’t really care. What Google cared about was did all of their usershave the opportunity to bid and get stock if they wished?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And they did. Hambrecht: And they did. And they did.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So there’s Google being Google again. Hambrecht: Google being Google. That’s exactly right. It’s a company with realprinciples, and they applied them to that underwriting process.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, now did you go after them? Or did they recognize that you were doingsomething different and come to you? Hambrecht: Well, a little of both. I had known Eric Schmidt before, and then it turned outthat Sergey Brin had an account with E*TRADE, which is one of ourdistribution partners, and he had bid on a number of our auctions. And don’tforget, the basis of Google’s economic model is an auction. So we didn’t haveto convince Sergey; we didn’t have to convince him that an auction was agood thing.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that Google deal kind of like the Genentech and Apple deals? That here’sthis company that you’ve had a part in bringing to the public in a verydifferent way. Hambrecht: Right. It certainly—yes. Was it this dramatic turning point that everybodywent to us? No. It’s a tough business to crack. But yes, that was the one thatreally changed things. After that, the Morningstar IPO happened, and rightafter it—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because of Google? Hambrecht: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because they were impressed.  Hambrecht: Joe Mansueto called—he was already on file with Morgan Stanley—and hesaid, “Can I do a Google thing?”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It can’t be just ethics: let’s be fair and give everybody a chance. What are theyseeing is the financial upside of all this? Hambrecht: Well, it depends on the deal. For example, at Morningstar, I can take youthrough the whole numbers, but we delivered a check for $150 million toSoftbank, the selling shareholder, instead of $100 million. It was a huge, $50million difference.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is that because the fees are less? Hambrecht: Well, partially, but the lion’s share is in the pricing. See, the conventionalunderwriter will say, “You have to discount underneath where we think themarket’s going to be.” And they will always be very conservative about wherethey think the market will be. So the discounts become very deep.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yet, the people bidding— Hambrecht: The people bidding—it’s the market. Look, our auction is no different thanopening a stock every morning on the New York Stock Exchange. You findthe proper clearing price. So the price discovery is very accurate, veryeffective, and you don’t have to discount it, so it’s a big difference.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How is Wall Street accepting this today? Hambrecht: They still hate it, because as a result of the bubble and all the hearings withthe SEC, the kickback portion from mutual funds, I think, has pretty muchgone away. If it’s still there, it’s very subtle. But the hedge funds have becomeso important, and hedge funds are driven almost totally by performance. So tome, it’s no accident that the three strongest IPO brokers are also the threestrongest prime brokers for hedge funds. And see, hedge funds don’t have toreport—nobody—so they still discount the price, and their inside buyers,largely the hedge funds, still get the benefit of it. And they get the benefit ofcommission flow and everything else from the hedge funds. So it’s still thesame thing; it’s just not as obvious. [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Are you happier now that you’re back, not quite where you started, but doingsomething closer to that?  Hambrecht: You know, I started this thing on the idea that maybe in a year or two I’d turnit over to the young guys and move on, and it just turned out to be a lot harderand a lot longer than I thought. And I just felt I had to see it through. We’realmost to the point now where we’re getting acceptance. It’s been a slowmarket but things are starting to happen. We’ve developed a very goodelectronic trading business, because we don’t do any proprietary trading;we’re a pure agency shop. We’ve applied the same principles to electronictrading. So yes, we have a nice business building here now, and my daughter’shere now as a co-CEO. I’ve got a really good one in New York. So we’redeveloping a team now, and I’m hopeful over the next year or so I’ll fadeaway.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And your daughter Betsy [Elizabeth Hambrecht Eu] will take over? Hambrecht: Yes. And her partner or two. I’ve always believed in a partnership structure. Idecided early in the game, I never really liked to work for anybody. I like towork with people, and to me that’s why partnerships are so great. So we havea partnership here, and they need me less and less now. I think over the nextyear, because there’s enough momentum going I will be needed even less, buthope to stay active when they need me.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And do you think your daughter will carry on with your philosophy? Or is theworld changing, and she’s part of a younger generation, and it will evolvedifferently. Hambrecht: Well, she’s been very successful on her own. She went out to Hong Kongafter college and worked for Barings and then Goldman Sachs and was verysuccessful. Then she started an Internet portal out there, and then when shecame back here she ran Salon.com. She can do things a lot better than I can![laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, in certain areas, let’s say! Hambrecht: She can be successful at whatever she chooses to do.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: She doesn’t need Dad, you’re saying. Hambrecht: She doesn’t need me. Yes, I think we share a lot of the same philosophy andsense of how to do business and why to do business, but it’s going to be up toher. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But it must make you feel good to have somebody so close to you carry on. Hambrecht: Well, she’s earned it. It’s always hard with families and everything, but it’s alot easier with Betsy. I remember Dan Case used to say all the time saying,“Can’t you get Betsy to come back?” [chuckling] Because she was doinggreat. I said, “Well, we can’t afford her. Goldman pays too much.” But,anyway, very lucky.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I’d like to hear a little bit about what I just call the larger context, meaningwhat is there about this region that has nurtured so many wonderful high-techcompanies and continues to despite the recession. Hambrecht: Well, as you know, that debate is raised for a long time. I personally havealways thought that the intellectual climate of the Bay Area has been what’sreally done it. Having several great educational institutions and several bigearly technology pools of intellectual capability made it very unique. Andwhen you really look at what’s happened, so many of the people came out ofthose kind of sources. And then, you know, an infrastructure did developwhere you can find lawyers that know what to do; you can find people whocan raise you the money; you can bootstrap all kinds of things; and there’s atolerance for startups here that allows you to get going. So what came first? I don’t know. The technology world has been driven bywhat I would call intellectual property, and so whatever attracted it here in thefirst place is what caused it. People will say, we were just lucky to get[Sherman] Fairchild. Probably. For some reason or other he brought thirteenof the smartest people out here, and they populated the whole area!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That’s a different slant on intellectual property. It’s human minds rather thanthe patent document. Hambrecht: Right. Exactly.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What about the governmental/legislative environment as it has changedover— You came in the late fifties? Hambrecht: Right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Sixty years or so. Is there anything that pops out in your mind as beingparticularly helpful or not to the growth of this region and what you weredoing specifically?  Hambrecht: Well, on the positive side, I think we’ve been very fortunate that we’ve hadsome political leaders that have understood what has really been happening inSilicon Valley and have adjusted to it. For example, Nancy Pelosi— PaulPelosi is a good friend, and we’ve known him forever. She really made a realattempt to understand what was happening down there and has been great. Somany of our elected people really get it. So it isn’t like you’re dealing withsomebody who’s still locked into the way things were done fifty years ago, ordefending an old, dying industry or anything like that. So I think we’ve beenlucky that way.On the negative side, I think some of the conservatism that’s set into this statehas hurt the educational system. And I think that’s really tragic. I find, forexample, it almost unbelievable that Berkeley and UCLA and places like thathave been able to maintain their excellence in the face of what’s happened. SoI just hope that ultimately we get back to— When I came out here in thefifties, I thought this was probably the best educational system in the country,from grade school on up through postdoc. It was, and it isn’t anymore.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: No, it’s not. And there’s our future. Hambrecht: The economy that we’ve developed out here requires educated people.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: We’re running out of time. Do you care to say anything about philanthropy? Hambrecht: Okay. Well, first of all, I think inherited wealth is probably not a great thing.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That’s your observation when it comes down to individuals? Hambrecht: Yes, I think it hurts individuals. And by the same token, a financial capabilityto go out to develop on your own and do what you want, that’s good too. Butseeing what Bill Gates and Warren Buffet have done, I think is a great thing.So what my wife and I decided to do, early, was try and think it through alittle bit more. I was busy so I said, “You do it.” And she’s gotten very good atit. She started Summer Search, along with two other people, which has been avery successful program to take inner-city kids and put them in a differentenvironment over the summer. They’ve had a great, great experience there.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Really! What kind of environment?  Hambrecht: They’ll go on outdoor-type stuff. It’s been quite a successful program. Highnineties graduation rate from college for kids from totally dysfunctional,tough, inner-city backgrounds.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Fabulous. Hambrecht: We also founded the San Francisco Friends School. So it has been reallyschools.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Are you a Quaker? Hambrecht: Yes. And we’ve been reasonably aggressive about college scholarships andstuff like that. That’s where I got my break.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Very good. Is there any ending comment that you care to make? Hambrecht: No, except I wish I were twenty years younger! [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you could start all sorts of enterprises? Hambrecht: Yes, I think right now there’s just a tremendous opportunity to do the H&Qthing all over again. All these good companies down there, and no one wantsto underwrite them because they’re too small. But that’s something you don’tget. [laughter] We haven’t figured that one out.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I really appreciate your time, and I thank you very much. Hambrecht: Thank you. Thank you. 
Interviewer: Let’s begin with your grandfather. Can we call him a venture capitalist? Draper: No, that was my father. We are three generations of venture capitalists: myfather, William H. Draper, Jr., myself, and my son, Tim Draper, who foundedDraper, Fisher, and Gurvetson.Here’s the history. My great grandfather came over from Canada to Michigan.He was a farmer and a preacher—minister. He was James Draper, andWilliam Draper was his son, who left Michigan and went, in the late 1800s, toNew York and started as a dentist. I don’t think they went to school then.They just bought a book or some papers on how to pull teeth. He moved toHarlem and he met my grandmother. She signed on as his bookkeeper andadministrative assistant—not a nurse. I’ve temporarily lost them, but I have two letters, one from him saying, “Ilooked in the mirror this morning, and I was the happiest man on earth. Youjust told me yesterday that you would marry me.” It was addressed to MissCarey. It went on and on about how they were going to have such a wonderfullife together, and it was an amazing letter. It was signed Dr. Draper. Her letterto him, very perfunctory, “Dear Dr. Draper, I’m so pleased with my owndecision to marry you, and I know we’ll have a wonderful life together.”[laughter] Those two letters are such a match up for that age. They had threechildren, and my father was the oldest. He started in a commercial bank inNew York, the First National Bank. Then he went to Dillon, Read investmentbanking firm in New York<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was his background in business? Draper: He was an NYU graduate. Young man. Business schools weren’t the thing atthat time. We’re talking about 1917 or something like that. He got interestedin more than economics, though. He was part of the Ford Peace Ship but thencame back and was an officer in the World War I, just at the tail end of WorldWar I. Young man—and then every summer, he kept his commission alive bygoing to Plattsburgh Camp up in New York State. At one time during thethirties, I can remember he drove our car up, and they put “Tank” on it, andthey had wooden guns. That was the state of our army training in the thirties. But he was very ahead of the curve on figuring out that war was coming. Sohe signed up, went to Washington in 1939, I think. He signed on with General[Lewis Blaine] Hershey. General Hershey was in charge of the draft. I guessthis was 1940 and he moved to Washington. I was in high school at the time—not quite in high school, I guess, in 1940. He, at that time I think, was acolonel. He got very involved in Washington. He was sent to the Pacific totrain a division, but they never got sent into action. He was in Hawaii. Then he came back from the war. Right after the war, he was then a one-stargeneral, and he went to Germany, to Berlin, as the economic advisor, becausehe’d had a lot of investment banking, all through the thirties. Tough time inthe investment banking world, by the way.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, I can imagine. Draper: Part of his job was to close up two or three offices of Dillon, Read that wereout of New York City. But he was economic advisor to General [Lucius D.]Clay for about three or four years, starting as soon as the war was over. Fortyfive till 1948, when Truman asked him to be the undersecretary of war. Therewas no defense department, so there was just secretary of the navy andsecretary of war which had the air force; it was called the army air corps. Hewas undersecretary of war in 1948. One of the connections I had at that time, and one of the thrilling things in myhistory, was that he asked me to come join him in Washington. They weregoing to fly a mission to Europe to look at the economic and the militarysituation in Europe at that time. This is post-war, June of 1948. So on the wayover—he had some blue-ribbon people onboard, civilians as well as militarygenerals. I was the aide to the group, because I had been in the army beforethat briefly, eighteen months, and had been a paratrooper with the 82ndAirborne. He said when he called, “Well, would you like to come back in thearmy?” And I was up at Yale then again. The army split my Yale time. “Oh!No way!” [laughs] “No way I’m going to go back in the army. I’ve hadenough of that.” He said, “No, just for a month, temporary duty, TDY theycall it, to just come over and be the aide to this mission.” So I said sure. It wassummer, you know. I got on the plane with all these big shots, and we landed in London. Theylearned that a few hours earlier the Russians had cut off Berlin, meaning theywouldn’t allow any ground traffic to go in. So my dad got on the phone withthe White House and General Clay at the same time, and they cooked up theairlift, the Berlin Airlift at that very moment. And so in London, we piled onsome symbolic coal, clothes, and food and flew into Tempelhof Airfield inGermany. General Clay came out to meet him, and then they announced theairlift, right then and there. So that was touching history, very big time.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But not enough to get you back interested in the military, I gather.  Draper: No. But we spent two weeks there in Berlin, and I was able to sit in on a lot ofthe staff meetings that General Clay ran. It was a very interesting, excitingtime in Berlin. Then we went down to Greece, where my dad was talking withGeneral [James A.] Van Fleet, who was then fighting the Communists inGreece, leading the Greek Army; we didn’t want the Communists to take overGreece. Then we went up the Adriatic to Trieste, where he met with [JosipBroz] Tito, who had just broken with the Russians, and then we went to Paris.I don’t know what they did, but I was assigned to get perfume. The only realthing I did on the whole trip was to get perfume for all these big shots for theirwives. I had a girlfriend in Paris and went around and got all these fancyperfumes—Joy and Guerlain and—what’s the—Nº Five?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, Chanel. Draper: Chanel Nº Five. I brought them all back to the airplane. The only thing any ofthem had heard of was Chanel Nº Five, so they thought, gosh, I don’t know ifmy wife’s going to think this Guerlain is so great— [<|endoftext|>
Interviewer chuckles] Theydidn’t know any of those names. I was feeling a little bad about the one bigtime assignment I had. See, I was only a second lieutenant. So that was my touching history with my dad. Then he came back to NewYork, and almost as soon as he got back there, he was asked to take over thetrusteeship of the Long Island Railroad by Governor [Thomas E.] Dewey,because they had, just at that time, had two bad accidents, killing a lot ofpeople, and the fear of going on that railroad was great. So my dad loved thechallenges. He was a great guy for taking over a challenge, and he said,without hesitation, he would do it. Now, he and my stepmother had bought—this is the kind of guy he was—theyhad bought a house in Tarrytown, near where the Rockefeller estate is.Tarrytown, New York. When he took this job, he put the house on the marketand moved into a hotel in Garden City, Long Island, in order to travel on theLong Island Railroad. He always traveled in either the front car or the rear car,in order to dissuade others from fearing them, and immediately put someprograms in place to improve the safety systems that they had. He felt heneeded to inspire people that the railroad really was safe.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why did people think of asking him to be in that position? Draper: Why did people think? This was Governor Dewey who makes theappointment of the trustee of the railroad.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, why—  Draper: The railroad was basically broke. It wasn’t making any money. Why did theythink of him? Because he had great creativity in financial matters. He had agood name as somebody who could solve problems. He was a leader; he hadbeen a general. So I think that’s the reason. That’s a good question.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How was he as a father? Draper: He was superb as a father. He was a great inspiration. He had a wonderfulquality of making you respect him and love him at the same time, and he hada cute sense of humor. But he set an example of ethics that was about as goodas anybody could’ve had. An example of that is—I was about five years old,but it’s a good story in the family. We went up to Canada, to Quebec, and wewent fishing. But the key thing was that my mother had seen this greenashtray with the name of the hotel on it, and she thought that would be a nicesouvenir of the trip, and packed it. It was in the hotel room. She told my fatherabout it, about 150 miles down the road, after we had left the hotel. And hesaid, “You what?” [laughs] And he turned right around and drove the car backto return the ashtray to the hotel. They had a fight every so often, I guess, butI’ve never known my mother to be so mad, and him to be so firm. And he wasfirm a lot of times, but he was never so sure of what he was doing. Here wewere, the two sisters and me in the back seat, and he was setting a wonderfulexample right there. He was that kind of guy.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Where are you in age among the siblings? Draper: Youngest. My sisters are living—one in South Carolina, one in NorthCarolina. One married a professor who taught law, and the other one wasmarried to a vice president of US Steel.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: With a father that accomplished, a young person could feel a little intimidated. Draper: True. It didn’t happen to me. He was an inspiration and somebody I loved tospend time with. But you see, all through the thirties, he was working hard ashell to hold onto a job. He had taken a mortgage on a house in Scarsdale, NewYork. Instead of paying the mortgage off when he got a $10,000 bonus in1929, he put the money into a coffee maker that was a new invention. [laughs]He was kind of practicing a little venture capital there.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So he was a risk taker.  Draper: And it didn’t work. No, he wasn’t a very big risk taker, but in that onedecision he was up. But from that point forward, he was very conservativeabout everything. His stocks were mostly conservative utilities. He workedreally hard to hold onto his job when people were being fired right and left inthe investment banking world. He wasn’t around a lot, but he was neverintimidating.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, I can imagine. Draper: So not being around, he wasn’t overwhelming as a father. He worked, I wouldsay, six days a week. I don’t know that he was ever home on Saturday. And heoften worked late in the night. So I didn’t see much of him in those times, andI got used to that. It was not a problem for me, it was just the situation.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, but that must’ve meant that your mother had much more familyresponsibility. Draper: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did she have help? Draper: Yes, we had a maid up until my mother died. We had a maid in the house, thatlived up on the third floor with me. She was in the room next to me. Therewere three floors in the house. That was Bessie. Then my mother got sick withcancer when I was twelve, and we went down to Washington and lived therefor a year. She went to Walter Reed Hospital. Then we came back up and shedied right away. I’m age thirteen, fourteen. So my sister really managed thehouse, my oldest sister, with just the two of us. His mother, my dad’s mother,was in the house for a while, but I don’t know that it was—I think mostly itwas the two of us. So that would’ve been my sophomore, junior year, and thenin my senior year, my younger sister and I moved to an apartment. Dad soldthe house for $10,000. That was it. [chuckling] My dad needed the money.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It was the Depression still, wasn’t it? Draper: Yes, it was the aftermath of the Depression. So all this time is war time, theforties, and we didn’t see him, except when he came back from active duty.When my mother died, he came back, and got reassigned to Washington, andso we were a lot closer at that point. But he left me in school, which was theright thing to do, at Scarsdale High School, That was one of the three bestschools in the country. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is that a public school? Draper: Yes, a very good one.Dad went there originally because they put a lot ofmoney into their school. Scarsdale was a young community, and so theyfocused on making it a good school system. That was a really good move thathe made. He couldn’t have afforded to send us to private school, and to be in aNew York City public school wouldn’t have been so good.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What were you getting interested in as a student? Draper: I was interested in sports. I was always good at math. I was kind of the starstudent in math. Mr. Ross, I can remember, one of the few teachers, he wasvery good with me, and they had a good math department. Then they had avery good English department, and I was not the star in English, by anymeans. So I was mostly interested in sports and my friends. People say, “Oh, too bad you didn’t have any parents around at the time ofyour high school.” Truthfully, that’s a time when I didn’t feel at all bad aboutthat. I could hang out with friends, and no problems at home. One fight mysister and I got into—I don’t know what it was over—I stormed out of thehouse, and she was afraid I was going to run off and go into the war orsomething, sign up for the army, and I was just going up to my friend’s house.So she’s a sweet lady. This is my older sister. She just wouldn’t hurt a flea,but she was pretty good in just keeping things in balance, but she gave mepretty much carte blanche, because there wasn’t much she could to controlme. She was working in New York, commuting in to the city.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: She was a number of years older than you? Draper: She was seven years older.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, because you were still in high school at that point. Draper: That’s right. She was out of college. She went to DePauw University, DePauwCollege, in Indiana.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So it sounds, the way you’re telling it, that losing a mother at a young agedidn’t stop your life. Draper: Not at all. It was terribly sad when it happened. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you close to her? Draper: Yes, yes, very. Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What was she like? Draper: She was elected most popular girl in her class at high school. She was inYonkers, New York. She was fun. She had a sister, who was my aunt, whowas a real character, and the first person to come to San Francisco in thefamily. To us, our mother seemed pretty common, compared to our aunt. Shewas in the fashion business. She worked for Lord and Taylor, and then laterwent to Texas, to Neiman Marcus, and then as a buyer of better dresses—andthen she came here, worked for Cyril Magnin at I. Magnin’s. But she was[imitating his aunt], “Dahling, well, what did you wear, dahling, [laughter] tothe pahty?” She was that kind of gal—a real star. She didn’t marry until late inlife; she didn’t have any children. But we were her children.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you felt close to her, as well? Draper: Very much, yes, yes. Then I really got close to my mother when it was just thetwo of us who went down to Washington, when I was in eighth grade. I wasnew in that class, so I didn’t have a lot of good friends in the class, so she wasmy buddy. We discovered the city together—Washington, D.C. is a fabulousplace to go look at the sites. We went to the FBI and they said—[clickstongue] I still remember—Big, bad Bill is going to—it now will have to beSweet William. I had just been fingerprinted by the FBI, [laughter] at agethirteen. But yes, I remember a lot of good things about our relationship. We werediscovering Washington together, and that was the closest I was to her. I don’tremember a lot of when I was younger, but she was a wonderful mother. Wehad a great family relationship, and that spirit continues today in our wholefamily. Overall, the families in the Draper line have all been pretty close.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, tell me how you ended up at Yale. Draper: The honest truth is, I went to Yale because one of my very closest friends inhigh school—I had four or five that were really close. One, Quentin Smith,was probably the brightest. I said, “Well, where are you going to go?” And hesaid, “Well, my father went to Yale; I’m going to go to Yale.” In those days,[laughs] you just applied to one school. So I said, “Well, I’ll apply to Yale.That sounds good.” My father had said, “You ought to apply to one of the big three.” We didn’t even know about Stanford. It didn’t come up, it wasn’t athought. The West was New Jersey.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: The West was New Jersey. [laughs] Draper: So he said, “You ought to go to one of the three.” I had the impression thatPrinceton was too social, and Harvard was too intellectual, and Yale would bejust about right. So I only applied to the one school. I had gotten a flier fromBucknell, which I liked. I thought that it looked like a good place. It wasfunny. I remember I ran for student body president. At that time, theapplications went out, so I told this school advisor—he was the assistantprincipal, basically. You didn’t have all the specialties at that time. He wastrying to help me sort it out. I said, “I’ll apply to Yale if I get elected; I’llapply to Bucknell if I get defeated.” I got elected, so I applied to Yale.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Very simple. Draper: It was simple in those days. I got an envelope back and I didn’t know whetherit was going to say yes or no, but I didn’t worry about it, somehow. Thingstook care of themselves. You could open it and you think, well, if it’s no, thenI’ll apply somewhere else and probably they’ll let me in— Amazing. Today,ooh! You sweat, your parents sweat, your grandparents sweat, your sisters andbrothers sweat for you, and everybody’s worried, and you send out fifteenapplications and keep your fingers crossed. Draper: They had some kind of a test. I don’t know if they—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Not the SAT? Draper: Yes, I think it was the SAT. It wasn’t that unusual in New York at that time totake tests that were set up by somebody else. Now it’s a big deal that there arethese national tests. But there, it was the New York Regents Test, taken beforethe SAT. The teachers wanted us to do well, and I’m sure they guided us incertain ways. So we were used to that. Then we took the SAT. At that time,they had one general test, and then you could take one of three differentspecial tests. There was a general that carried mostly English and math, andthen you had another test that you took. What the choices were, I’m not sure.But perhaps one was language, and one was history and—I don’t know, I’mnot sure. That’s how I got to Yale. My dad was in the army, and came up with me on the train from Scarsdale toNew Haven, to take me up to Yale to have my interview. They do no interviews today. That was the first time I’d seen Yale. I had already applied.He and I went up to look it over and meet somebody there. I got a goodrecommendation from my principal, who had worked with me as president ofthe student body. I remember years later, seeing his recommendation in theYale file. I later was on the board of Yale trustees, and I don’t know if it wasin that context or what. But I think it was when I was still a kid. Somehow Isaw my own recommendation, and it was very nice. “Billy bore the burden ofleadership.” So that was great.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: At some stage, you took a course from Georges Doriot. Do you remember thatcourse, and was it formative in any way? Draper: Very well, very well. At Harvard Business School. Yes. Georges Doriot wasunique. He gave a course called Manufacturing. Manufacturing had nothing todo with manufacturing, but it was his philosophy of life. In those days, youwent right from college into Harvard. You didn’t have to work for two years.A lot of the students were pretty young and inexperienced, and business wasquite a new thing. So his philosophy was exciting to us. He had a Frenchbackground, and he had been in the U.S. Army, in charge of the quartermastercorps, I think, at one time. Doriot was a very popular professor. He was a veryopinionated guy, who knew exactly what he wanted to tell us. He wanted us tohear what it’s like in real business. So things like, “Don’t stay in Boston.When you graduate, you’ve got to go out and get where men are men, and livein Chicago or Cincinnati or Pittsburgh. Do real things and build big—buildsomething and make a difference. Boston: it’s all too easy.” Then anotherpoint he made: “Keep your antenna up. Always keep your antenna up.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: For new deals, you mean? Draper: Well, not deals. It depends. Whatever business you’re in. You might be in theadvertising business or—yes, for new customers or new ideas or—.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. New anything. Draper: Yes, and he was big on ideas. Well, the first thing he did was unique atHarvard. He grouped four or five people. He just said, “Break up and formteams and form a group of four or five people.” Then you worked togetherwith that group all year. That was a good idea for business, because that’swhat it’s all about, working with other people. So he said, “You’ve got to turnin an idea a week.” By the way, the group also had a main goal of writing athesis, as a group. We picked metalworking, different aspects ofmetalworking; others might’ve picked other things. So you had to turn in anidea a week, other than this thesis, other than taking your tests, and other than listening to him, because he lectured big time. Oh, by the way, Harvard usesthe case system, and it’s not a lecture system. But he lectured. He never wentto the case system. One idea I presented, [laughs] which I still think is a good idea; instead ofbuttons, I thought we could save a lot of time if you just have a snap whichlooks like a button, or whatever you want as an ornament, but just have a littlesnap. And you just go choo-choo-choo [imitating sound of snaps beingfastened]. Everything was timed, too. We all were under the gun to get everything donefast. So we’re thinking, how do we do things faster? Another thing he keptsaying was, “If you wake up in the middle of the night and you think of agreat idea, write it down!” One idea only is selected in the class.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Of all the ideas. Draper: Yes, of all of them.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And how big would a class be? Draper: I would say fifty. So one idea came from our group that got selected. My ideadidn’t get selected. [laughs] That’s just one thing I remember. There wereother ideas we had; I suppose I had some. But one of them that one of myfriends had was to put a light on pens, so that in the middle of the night,[laughter] the light would be there! Another one was a chemical engineer andhe had the idea—Birds Eye Food was brand new then, frozen food. You neverhad frozen food until the fifties. And so he had an idea of putting a spot onthe—some kind of chemical thing he knew would show when a frozen foodmelted. And so if it melted, it meant it wouldn’t be good. So if it melted, thisspot would turn red from green or something like that. Anyway, he got us all thinking about a lot of things. The people that didn’ttake his course, regret it today, because they’ve heard so much about him. Hewas a fabulous guy. I never did do the scrapbook that he said we should all do.But I got a distinction anyway because he didn’t ask for the scrapbooks to beturned in. He always said, “Your wives—,” some of us were married, but nottoo many. Maybe a third of us were. “Those of you with wives, or yourgirlfriend, they should be helpful to you. They should read Business Week,and underline or tear out the articles that are important for you to read. Theyhave to be total partners with you in making you successful.” His whole ideawas you’re going to rise to the top if you keep your antenna up, and you keepdiligent, and you get your wife working on your side. My wife had a job but she didn’t have a career at that time, of course. That was not what was done.There was no career path for women.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How did your wife feel about that? Draper: She laughed. Just like you’re laughing! [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I should’ve asked you, before we got into Harvard Business School, hadyou decided at Yale that business was where you were headed? Draper: I don’t know, it was just a natural, I think. I was shaped a lot by my father,and he was a businessman prior to government service and the military, andhe too knew that Harvard Business School was a good thing to do. At thattime, it was not old. I don’t know how old it was, but it probably was morethan twenty years old at that time. So he encouraged it, and having gone in thearmy, I had my whole way paid by the GI Bill.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because your father was still kind of marginal, in terms of income? Draper: Yes. He made some money, but money was never important to him. Publicservice was his driving force.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now, did you, when you entered Harvard Business School, have an idea ofwhat line of business you might go into? Draper: No. Well, after taking Doriot’s course, I thought I’d better go into heavyindustry. One summer I worked in a steel mill, so that when I got an offerfrom Inland Steel, I went to work for them. I didn’t apply to a lot of places,General Electric wasn’t hiring. When I graduated, was kind of a recessiontime, ’54. So I was glad to get a job, because I had a wife and I had a baby atthat point.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Whom did you marry? Draper: I married a great gal. I was really lucky there. It’s a good story. I met her on aboat going over to Europe. Her name was Phyllis Culbertson, a senior atSmith College travelling with her sister on an American Express tour. I hadbeen in Korea; I fought in Korea as an infantry officer. I came back and wentover to see my dad for the first time in a year, because I’d been in Korea andhe had been in Paris in another job which Truman asked him to do. A big job—manage the Marshall Plan from Paris. [W. Averell] Harriman managed itfrom Washington. So Harriman was the overall director, but my father was theguy on the ground.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: He was the deputy, maybe? Draper: Yes. He was the executive officer, he was roving ambassador. His title wasSpecial Representative of the President, in charge of the Marshall Plan. Hewas the first ambassador to NATO, and he was in charge of Mutual Security[Agency], MSA. He had all three jobs at once.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: My heavens! Draper: And that leads to venture capital, and the first venture capital company here inthe west, because he met [General] Fred [L.] Anderson, who had run the VIIIBomber Command. Harriman suggested Anderson, who had been head of theVIII Bomber Command in London. There was a movie written about himcalled Twelve O’Clock High, I think. It was a very critical time during thewar, bombing Berlin and weakening their willpower, and bombing Dresdenand all those places. So he was sending boys to their death, knowing it; but alot of them came back and it was a great success. Anyway, Fred Anderson was my dad’s deputy in Paris. They didn’t knoweach other, but Averell Harriman said they’d make a good team. Because mydad, he had a very good mind, and he was very good at strategy and makingthings work, creative on solving problems. Anderson was a risk taker and adynamo.The two of them were a great team. So they cooked up the idea to start aventure capital company in California, because Harriman had been here, outin the air base out here, Travis Air Force Base. He came back to Californiaafter they’d served together for a number of years in Paris. My dad went to bechairman of the Mexican Light and Power Company in Mexico City, marriedhis assistant he met in Paris, who was a WAC, army WAC. Not a wacko, aWAC. [laughter] They lived in Mexico for five years, she loved it and heloved it. But Anderson and my dad lined up the idea of starting a venturecapital [firm]. My dad had always thought about venture capital as beingbetter and more fun for me, more interesting, than investment banking, whichhe had done.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But there wasn’t even that term then, was there?  Draper: Yes, there was. In New York City. I had heard the term before. I’ll tell youwho there was there. Are we running a little late?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. Draper: See, when you’re asked to talk about yourself, it’s dangerous. [chuckling] SoAnderson was a terrific guy. That’s a whole other story. But venture capitalwas— I’m trying to think. There’s two. There was American Research andDevelopment in Boston, started by our friend Georges Doriot. There’s a bookcalled The First Venture Capitalist about him. So there’s that. But that wasn’tthe first. I think J.H. Whitney was the first. But that was more family money.The first professional one was in Boston, and then Draper, Gaither &Anderson was the first one in the West.[End Audio File 1]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So we’re talking about the late fifties, aren’t we? Draper: Right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because I have notes here that Draper, Gaither & Anderson was founded in1958. Draper: ’59, I think, it was. There’s an article in Business Week. It’s about January orso of 1960. It’s got a picture of all of us who were there in the startup ofDraper, Gaither & Anderson. It’s got General Anderson, it’s got [H.] RowanGaither, [Jr.], and my dad, and me and [A.] Crawford Cooley, and Don[ald] L.Lucas and the whole group. Pete Bancroft didn’t come until later. He cameafter I left. That’s a different story.But anyway, you asked about the term venture capital. That was not wellknown, but it was known in New York circles. Doriot had started hisAmerican Research and Development in Boston in the mid-fifties, I guess. Hiswas maybe the first professional one with a bunch of unrelated people asinvestors. I think J.H. Whitney was mostly family money. And theRockefellers—there was no Venrock. Now it’s called Venrock. ButRockefeller Brothers did some venture capital. They started Minute Maid andEastern Airlines. Those were venture capital. But Queen Isabella really started venture capital, if you go way back, becauseshe gave Columbus the money and the wherewithal to take a ship out andbring back treasure. And that’s the beginning. Not even the beginning; there’sprobably something way before that. So the concept was there, but theterminology, you’re right, was not known. So my wife would describe to herfriends what I did, and she would describe it as private banking. SiliconValley, of course, was not named Silicon Valley, and we were in a verydifferent time then. It was a small community. Really, San Francisco is prettysmall. It was 750,000. Hasn’t grown much. But around it, it was nothing likethe eight million people living here today. It was orchards out in Sunnyvaleand that was a very different sort of a time.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was Draper, Gaither & Anderson the reason you came west? Draper: Yes. I was working at Inland Steel, and did that for five years, and met[Franklin] Pitch Johnson there.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What were you and he doing? Draper: Well, he was in the mill, foreman in the open hearth. I was, in the first year, ina training program called Randall’s Rangers. Clarence Randall was thechairman of the board at the time. Young guys who had promise were in thegroup, like five or six of us.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You mean being trained for executive positions? Draper: We were being trained for executive positions. So we worked in the mill thefirst year, but went out to different— went up on an ore boat up in LakeMichigan, crawled in a seventeen-inch mine (seventeen inches is the height ofthe coal mine) down in Kentucky that Inland owned. We’d go crawl in and doall the ugly things; but we’d also go to the purchasing department, the salesdepartment, and meet with the chairman of the board. So it was a neat year.Then I picked the sales department to go work for. There were only ninesalesmen. Fascinating. Nine salesmen for— it was the sixth largest steelcompany in the country, and the best managed. But they had the tightest salesdepartment. It was very close. So they didn’t have many levels between thecustomer and the president, because they wanted— they had very goodrelations with their customers. Anyway, I ran South Chicago steel district.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And was your MBA helping you with this?  Draper: Yes, it did, it did. But you know the biggest help? [laughs] HBS taught mehow to draw up a budget. My budget was $400 a month. That was my salary,and that was really tight for me. I had to live within the budget, and so mywife and I, we got our first couches—a couch and chair and some otherfurniture from the Goodwill. I still give the Goodwill checks, because that wasvery helpful to me! [laughs] We worked on the budget. Oh she’s a Smithgraduate and an English major, and when it’s dollars and cents and numbers,she fades. Her eyes glaze over. But she paid a lot of attention to this budgetthat I had learned how to do at Harvard Business School. So I had this yellowfoolscap paper and lines of numbers. We had entertainment: $5. [laughs] Weliterally went out to dinner about once every three months or two months. Wedidn’t do that much. Cathie Johnson, Pitch’s wife, will tell you that whenshe’d come to dinner she’d say, “Phyllis, it must be the end of the month.”[laughs] Because we had noodles or something like that for dinner! [laughter]But it was a very tight budget. We really lived within it. Harvard helped mewith that budget. You have to line it out and you have to parse it out anddecide what’s important. But yes, of course, it helped me in general, becauseit was an overview of how business works. I really knew nothing aboutbusiness when I went to Harvard.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It sounds as though one of the things Doriot was trying to teach you peoplewas what it would be like in the real world of business. Does that imply thatother business courses were more theoretical? Draper: Harvard Business School is built on the case system, and has been ever sinceit [was] founded. The case system is very clearly a story about a company anda problem. You read the story and you have a problem at the end: what shouldSarah do? Then you write the answer to this real case. They were the first, andlots of other business schools use their cases. That’s a big source of theirincome. So other professors would have something—like I took production;how to read a blueprint; how to manage the foreman who has a problem withhis crew and he’s brought it up to you, and you’re the superintendent, and hesaid he’s leaving or Sam is leaving. A lot of personnel kinds of problems. Inproduction, it was a lot of how to produce something, the cost of the product,and how labor is added to the cost. Then you have accounting, too, which istough to teach by case method, but they did it. Then they had marketing, andagain, by case method they’d show you that you could package thisadvertising pitch and—do you cut your advertising budget? Or do yourecognize that half the budget is wasted, but you don’t know which half?[laughs] So therefore, it’s very hard to cut. Another, sales management.Another one was business practices, business policy or something like that. Ifyou had a disgruntled employee walk into your office and you wanted to calmeverything down and you wanted to get him talking, or her talking, the firstthing you want to do is offer them a cigarette. [laughter] <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, was Doriot pulling this all together? Draper: No. Not at all. Doriot was set in his ways, and he was not going to teach bythe case method, he was going to teach by lecture, to tell you how to read theNew York Times in ten minutes. Start with the obituaries, because you’ll seewho has really made something out of their life. You don’t want to be one ofthose me too people down here on a long list. You want to be somebody thatends up with an obituary. [laughs]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So he was always pushing? Draper: Yes! Oh, he was pushing, and telling you to hit your potential and keep yourantenna up and drive forward and always think of your employees. They’re allthere to help you. You want to help them and give them the support they need.He had a lot of good advice, but most of his philosophy is a little bit archaictoday.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, but you’re talking about the fifties, aren’t you? Draper: There were no women in our school. Except those that read and graded thestudent papers submitted by nine o’clock every Saturday night. We had to turnin a paper, the whole class did, on a given case. Of course, it destroyed ourdates, because you work right up to the end. Before we were married in myfirst year, Phyllis, when she was at Smith—came up, and brought a friend whocould type. I couldn’t type. So I had my paper ready by six o’clock, and thefriend had to type for about an hour, and then we could go out to dinner or dosomething with the friend and a blind date I had arranged. But no womenprofessors that I know of, and no women students. No women in theadministration, at any high level.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And Harvard wasn’t exactly fast at getting women undergraduates, either.Seems to me it was well into the sixties, was it not, before it became co-ed? Draper: Sixties or seventies, yes. You asked me one question which I didn’t really geta full answer on. Essentially, how I met my wife.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh right. Draper: I had been in the trenches in Korea during the war. I came back and my oldgirlfriend had written me a Dear John letter, [laughs] that she’d met another guy, who I knew very well. He was a Yalie, he was a friend. So I was lookingaround, but not aggressive. I was just mostly interested in getting on a boatand going over to see my father in Paris. So I signed up with the HollandAmerican Line. You didn’t just fly over to Europe. You go by boat, becauseit’s the cheapest way. Holland American Line was the cheapest way, too. I had been dating a gal in Wellesley earlier. Her friend said, “Look up theCulbertson sisters.” So when I got on the boat, I stood behind these tall girls.They were in a line, which I thought was for food. But turned out it was fordeck chairs. I said, “Are you by chance the Culbertson sisters?” Phyllisdescribes it as they just about dropped, because they thought they didn’t knowa single soul on that boat. They were mostly foreigners. So we, of course, sattogether, because it was deck chairs, for day after day. So I invited her tomarry me the third day after we were out there. [<|endoftext|>
Interviewer laughs] The thing that I didn’t tell you is that she had a ring on at that time, biggerthan the one she’s wearing today, [laughter] from the president of hisfraternity, from Amherst, and all this. She didn’t say yes, but she didn’t sayno. She was a curly headed, dark-haired gal—I’ll show you a picture—andshe was—big smile and very easy to talk to. Well, she thought I should beaiming at her sister, who didn’t have anybody interested—but I wasn’tinterested in her sister, I was interested in her. They were on a trip to goaround Europe, on the American Express tour of Europe. So when I got to Paris, I said to my dad, “I met this gal. I think I really want tomarry her, and so instead of spending the summer here in Paris with you—.”[laughs] I ended up spending two days there and then I went and met them inBrussels or Bruges, followed them to Italy and through Switzerland. It wasmostly women on the trip, so they were happy to have me, and never chargedme a dime for going on the whole trip. Then we came back to France, Paris.On Phyllis’s twenty-first birthday, I took her to a place that my stepmothersuggested, which had all kinds of violins. When one of them, in the john, metme, he said, “Your girl’s birthday? And it’s my birthday. We’ll play for you!”So they come over and play Happy Birthday to her. It was a lovely evening.The only thing is, they kept having glasses of champagne, and the bill wasmuch higher than I expected, so I couldn’t cover it alone. And so I emptiedher wallet. She and I just had enough to cover, with about a one-franc tip. Wehad gotten all different kinds of money around Europe. All the people that hadgreeted us on the way in with a sweep of the hand greeted us on the way outthe same way but the open hand waited for a tip, or so I thought. [laughter] Sowe gave them a Swiss franc and an Italian lira and a this and a that, but wehad nothing for the taxi driver. Her sister was in the hotel somewhere, where Iwasn’t staying; I was staying with my dad. So we went in the taxi, went upand got her sister to pay the taxi. It was too late for me to get the last subway home, and it didn’t go again untilsix the next morning. My father calls about three in the morning saying, “Phyllis—” [laughs] We’re just the three of us, sitting around talking.“Phyllis, is Bill there?” And she, “Oh, yes, he is.” [laughs] And then,[whispers] “It’s your father!” And he said, “You’ve got to get on the boatgoing back home.” We were all going home the next day. “But I can’t gethome, because the subway doesn’t open until six o’clock.” “Well, you’regoing to get—.” So anyway, I did make the boat and went back home with mysister, who had been over there in Paris all summer. The four of us got alongvery well, and her sister, five of us. About October, Phyllis hadn’t made up her mind yet and was still wearing thering. [laughs] And I go down and have a date with her. So I finally said, “Hey,listen.” She remembers this to this day, because the term I used was exactlywhat caught her. I said, “Hey, listen, make up your mind. There are a lot offish in the sea.” She remembers “There are a lot of fish in the sea.” [laughs]So she returned her engagement ring pretty soon after, married me a weekafter graduating from Smith and we’ve been married for fifty-five years.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That’s quite a story. Draper: Yes. Three kids. Happy family.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: We started on Draper, Gaither & Anderson. Why don’t we finish that episode.You talked about Anderson, but who is Gaither? Draper: He was very special. A real super star. The lynchpin of the firm. He was theyoungest of the three. There were three senior partners, and then there werefive young men like myself, who were going to learn the trade, I guess. Well,we were all learning it in a way. Gaither had been head of the FordFoundation; chairman of the board of the Rand Corporation; a lawyer whowas the managing partner of Cooley Crowley Gaither, here in San Francisco,best law firm, did our law work; and wrote the Gaither Report for Kennedy,which was about the missiles, and the fact there were no missiles. He was awonderful guy. He did all those things, started Draper, Gaither & Anderson,came down with cancer, died at the age of fifty, after doing all those things.His son is now a partner of Sutter Hill. Full circle—helped do some of thelegal work for Sutter Hill, had graduated from Princeton and then StanfordLaw School, became chairman of the board of Stanford. He lived on to dosome of the things that his dad didn’t. Well, it’s just a great story.So here were three powerhouse guys starting Draper, Gaither & Anderson.They needed five young guys. Anderson having done a few privateinvestments—let’s see, we called them—special situations. That’s what it wascalled, special situations. He would make some investments in special situations with a guy named Larry Duerig, who had gotten an investmentbanking background here in San Francisco with a small firm.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, so this was on the West Coast. Draper: Yes, this is all West Coast now. Yes, it started right here. Palo Alto. So thethree senior partners, and then Larry Duerig was kind of an in-between. Heknew a lot about the investment business and so on. And then these fiveyoung guys—Don Lucas was twenty-nine years old and had been in theinvestment business in New York. Crawford Cooley—it was Cooley CrowleyGaither. So he was the son of the lawyer named Cooley. Crawford had beenworking with an inventor who was in on the original color television. But hewasn’t a scientist himself—Crawford was just Crawford. [chuckles] And thenthree other guys. We started in a small place in Palo Alto, and then builtsomething on the Stanford campus, with a ninety-nine year lease.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was there Stanford Industrial Park at that point? Draper: Well, in a way there was, because Hewlett-Packard was on it and Varian wason it. Yes, so in a way there was Stanford Park. But the idea of the ninety-nineyear lease was pretty new, and we signed one of the early ones. That wasbrilliant business management of Stanford since the Leland Stanford giftdisallowed any sale of Stanford land which was truly brilliant..<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why that area as opposed, for example, to San Francisco? Draper: Because of Stanford.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, and spawning little companies. Draper: Yes. So Dave Packard and Bill Hewlett were brought together by Stanford,and the Varian brothers, and it was spreading a little more and so—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So was the firm looking at high-tech investment? Draper: The firm was looking at high tech only, yes. Matter of fact, I’ll give you alittle story on that. I went off to Hawaii, because a guy named Chinn Howanted to build an apartment called a condominium. It was a brand new term.Only one other condominium in the world was down in Arizona somewhere.You had to get your head around the fact that somebody would buy some 20space. They didn’t get the ground, they owned a space. They were smallapartments, 500 square feet, in something called the Ilikai on Waikiki Beach.So I, as a young guy, was happy to go and look at this and thought it was darngood. Lowell [S.] Dillingham was a big name. He and I sat and had mai taisone evening on the beach, and I was feeling no pain. But I literally fell in lovewith this project of Chinn Ho’s—went up to see the architect up in Seattle,who built the [Space] Needle, the famous Needle. Same architect for theIlikai, which is in three parts. It was like a Y. I just saw it on paper and a littlemodel that Chinn Ho, the promoter, was putting together. Anyway, I cameback, thought this is the greatest thing, we’ve got to do this deal. TheRockefellers were one of the three key limited partners, and the limitedpartnership was set up just like they are today. It was really the first of its kindwhere it was a general partnership with limited partners, where the generalpartners got 20 percent of the carry and got a fee to manage, like 1.5 percentfor the management costs.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, now, was that a new arrangement then? Draper: Yes. That was new.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did Draper— Draper: I think it was the first one. Cooley Crowley Gaither, the law firm, created that.So they’re all the same now. You can do the same, almost identical.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And do you think that Cooley, et cetera, invented that way of managing aventure? Draper: Of the legal agreement. No, I can’t answer that. I think there were generalpartners and limited partners in other parts of the country. But certainly, it wasnew out here, and it was obviously a very good way for general partners to getpart of the action and still get taxed by capital gains, and not ordinary income.Not being paid a salary. Or not even a bonus. You had a stake in the successof the enterprise. But just to complete the story. So I get a call to go see the Rockefellers inNew York, the senior partner of the Rockefellers. He was an impressive guy,also a Yalie, so I thought, we’ll get along fine. He was mad as hell. I’m sittingthere, a young associate. And I’m just saying what a great deal the Ilikai is.And he said, “We can do real estate deals. You’re there to do technology!Why in hell are you looking at building a condominium?” I didn’t know atthat time—he probably did know—they hadn’t yet done the Mauna Kea. Haveyou ever been to Hawaii, the Mauna Kea? <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. Draper: They did that very early on, and several brothers were going to have a bigstake in Hawaii later on. So I said, “I don’t know, I just think this is a verygood deal. But if you guys don’t like it—.” Limited partners can’t touch themoney once they’ve signed up for a general partnership. So technically, wehad every right to do anything, because there were no restrictions saying wehad to do technology deals. DGA was to go into the venture capital business.Venture capital could be investing in a condominium on Waikiki Beach.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So there was no specialization, as there tends to be today. Draper: No, it was very general. So just looking for special situations, that was what itwas called. So I said, “Well, whatever.” Nobody wanted to touch the deal ifthe Rockefellers, one of the three big partners, limited partners—two millioncame from them, two million came from Lazard Frères, and two million fromone of General Anderson’s friends in New York. I think it’s probablymentioned in Business[Week] article. I’d say it’s in January or February of1960.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Around this time, Henry J. Kaiser is seeing the development potential ofWaikiki, right? Draper: Yes. I went over on one of the first jets. So the jet airplane is what broughtHawaii together. They hadn’t yet developed the outer islands; it was all onOahu.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: When is this condominium deal? Draper: 1960. Or ’59. Probably ’59.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, the firm, by my notes, was founded in 1958. Yes. Draper: I think we moved out here in ’59. I was there before my father by a fewweeks.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you were there as an associate at the very beginning. Draper: I think it was September of ’59, yes. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It was your father that was the attractant, wasn’t it? You were still a relativelyyoung man— Draper: Oh, yes. Oh, I knew nothing about anything.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was the whole Hawaiian tourism business an obvious thing? Or were youearly in the game in recognizing the potential there? Draper: Oh, no, I think Chinn Ho heard there was money coming together in PaloAlto. We got good publicity on this brand new venture capital company. Ithink he looked us up through a friend or something. I was just doing the—due diligence is the common word today. We didn’t have that word then, butthat was what I was doing. I was doing the due diligence.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So maybe it was Chinn that was the visionary. Draper: Oh, yes, I think he was. He was a real estate developer. But it was happening.Lowell Dillingham knew that it was happening. They built a shopping center,the first one in Hawaii, which they took me out to see. No, there was no oneperson that envisioned what was going to happen in Hawaii. The jet airplane!But they all knew. People who lived there knew this was big and that thingswere going to develop. It was owned by five families, basically.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Should we stop here? Draper: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I thank you. And we’ll continue this very interesting story. Draper: Yes, yes![End of Interview] <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: In this second session, we’re up to the next step in your very long career,which is the Draper and Johnson Investment Company. Last time you told methat Pitch Johnson was a Yale classmate. Draper: No. He was Harvard Business School. And not a classmate. We startedtogether, but then I got called back into the Korean War. I started in the classof 1952 and finished in the class of 1954. And he was in the class of ’52.We’re the same age. He came out of Stanford University, and then wentstraight to Harvard, and I did, too, from Yale.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How did the re-association with Pitch Johnson occur? Draper: Well, I didn’t know him at Harvard.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, I didn’t realize that. Draper: There were 800 people in the class, and I didn’t meet him. I met him for thefirst time at Inland Steel, in East Chicago, Indiana, where he was working inthe mill, and I was in Clarence Randall’s Ranger Program, they called it, atraining program for about five or six of us, to go around to all the differentparts of the steel company. I ended up a year later, after the training program,I went into sales. But we started out in the mill, and that’s how I met him. His wife and my wifebecame best friends, and he and I became best friends. Our kids grew uptogether. We came to Inland with one baby girl, and he didn’t have anychildren at the time. He had his first baby there, and we had our second childthere. East Chicago is a mill town on Lake Michigan, near Chicago, but it’s inIndiana. Inland Steel was the sixth largest steel company in the country butprobably the best managed. It was very good. The Block family really owneda large share of the stock. It was publicly traded stock. And so Pitch and I metthat way. So then when I came out west to join my father five years later, I was going tohis hometown. Pitch was born in Palo Alto, California, and our offices,Draper, Gaither & Anderson, was setting up in Palo Alto, and eventuallyended up on the Stanford campus, in a lease there, a ninety-nine year lease. Ithink it was the first ninety-nine year lease that Stanford gave.  And so when I decided to start my own company, left three years after beingwith Draper, Gaither & Anderson, it wasn’t too hard a decision to call Pitchand ask if he wanted to be a partner, because he was an engineer, I wasn’t. Iwas an economics and history and political science kind of a major at Yale.Divisional major, they called it. So he was going to be a great partner, and Iwas delighted to give him the call. He took like a minute and a half to decidethat he wanted to come back to Palo Alto and join me. If you live throughthose Chicago winters and in a steel mill—Palo Alto sounded pretty good tohim, I think. The idea of venture capital sounded good. I went out to Chicagoto meet with him, and then later we designed the plan for the company on mydining room table, or kitchen table, I think, in my house in Palo Alto.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How would he have known of venture capital? Draper: He didn’t. I told him what it was about, and so he learned it with me. Iwouldn’t have known [laughs] anything about it either, except for those threeyears at Draper, Gaither & Anderson.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why did you leave Draper, Gaither & Anderson? Draper: I left because I really wanted to do my own thing.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How did your father feel about that? Draper: Great. He was delighted. He was worried, of course, and thinking it’s a riskybusiness. But he loaned me $50,000, and Pitch’s father-in-law, who waspresident of Standard Oil of New Jersey, loaned him $50,000. We each had$25,000, and so we put $75,000 each into the business, so there was $150,000. We started a small business investment company, so called, SBIC. Thegovernment gave us license number twelve. We were the twelfth one to start. Ihad learned about the program from a friend of mine at Inland Steel, as amatter of fact, who sent me the description of this new SBIC program underEisenhower. It was Eisenhower’s idea, I think, for government to help smallbusinesses get going with more venture capital. It leveraged our money. Weput in the $150,000. They agreed to lend us $300,000. The loan was a ten-yearloan, at 5 percent interest. So that seemed like a good deal, and it helped usget going. We made, I don’t know, maybe ten or fifteen investments, and then after threeyears we merged with a real estate company named Sutter Hill. It was a realestate development company for developing shopping centers, but it was a small company, too, and they got an SBIC license also and were just startingto go into venture capital. We’d had about three years’ experience. They hired a guy named Paul [M.] Wythes, who was a classmate of thepresident of Sutter Hill land company, called Sutter Hill, Limited, I think. Sothen Paul became vice president of the SBIC, and I became president. Wewere a little early in venture capital, to be honest with you. Pitch had an offerto become a consultant or some operating job in Air Products, over inOakland, I think it was, and so he went and did that. We built up Sutter Hill, Paul and I. Then a few years later, we paid back thegovernment and we started a new limited partnership called Sutter HillVentures; the other was Sutter Hill Capital Company. Sutter Hill Ventureswas in the tradition of—well, it was the same format as the Draper, Gaither &Anderson, a limited partnership, where we got one company, Genstar, a bigCanadian company with a lot of assets in Canada, and they were the onlylimited partner. We were the general partners, Paul and I, and then we addedtwo more, shortly after making the deal with Genstar.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You said that you were a bit early in venture capital. What were youthinking— Draper: Yes, Pitch thought he would go back to the operating world, and that he wouldgo into more of an operating role. I think that was what was going on in hismind. So we made a couple of good investments. One was Electroglas, [Inc.]that made a diffusion furnace. And we got a fellow who operated a boatcompany, a fellow named Chuck [Charles W.] Gravelle. Chuck had been inMinnesota, and he had been hired by this fellow who owned a boat company.Chuck was brought on to do his marketing. He had a budget of $25,000 forthe year, and he blew it all on one ad in the Life magazine. It was a brilliantmove because the ad said, “If you want to become a dealer for this boatcompany,” and it had a picture of the boat, “send in enough to buy one boat.”Well, they were overwhelmed by the orders, and so he became rich, inMinnesota terms, in this small town in Minnesota. So he and his wife felt alittle uncomfortable. In a small town, it’s difficult to be too wealthy, or youhave too much focus. So they wanted to get out and they came to California.So we said, “Well, why don’t you run this company, Electroglas? Because theguy we’ve got is Arthur Lash. I think he came out of Fairchild, which madesemiconductors. He was an engineer and not a CEO. So you always need tohave somebody that’s running the company, and you need somebody with thetechnology, and we had the two of them together. It worked out. ChuckGravelle didn’t know anything about technology, but he was a darn goodmarketing, sales, organized person, and the company was very successful.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Had you perceived that?  Draper: Well, I knew in my experience at Draper, Gaither & Anderson that having theright management team is essential.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right. But you looked at this guy and you saw that he had potential in thatregard? Draper: Yes. Sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Sutter Hill, I read, is called the first venture capital company on the WestCoast. Draper: No, Draper, Gaither & Anderson is. It went Draper, Gaither & Anderson;Draper and Johnson; Sutter Hill. And as I say, Sutter Hill had just gotten anSBIC in about 1965, ’64 or something. So they were just starting, and theyhired Paul Wythes to do that and maybe made an investment or two. But thereal sequence was Draper, Gaither & Anderson; Draper and Johnson; SutterHill.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And the connection between Draper and Johnson and Sutter Hill Capital wasmore the SBIC than the fact that Sutter Hill Capital was a real estatecompany? Draper: No, the real estate company did not end up succeeding, in the long run. Theydid okay for five years or something. They ended up getting squeezed whenthe interest rates ran way up. President Carter was president. It squeezed themand they went out of business. But the venture capital business flourished, andit was one of the most successful in the early days, as it is today. Then severalothers started in the valley. Kleiner Perkins. In Tom Perkins’s book,autobiography, called the Valley Boy[:The Education of Tom Perkins]—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, I’ve read it. Draper: —he gives me credit for bringing him the first good deal they had. They had acouple of bad deals in Kleiner Perkins, but I brought him a company calledQume that we invested in, and they came in too, and that was a whole otherstory. That was a great story about a Chinese American that I can tell you.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, we can go into that later.  Draper: Whenever you want.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But I’m interested in this very early stage, when venture capital wasn’t even aterm. According to what I’ve read, the term was not coined till 1971. Draper: I think you told me that once before. But that’s not true, because I knew theterm venture capital when I was at Inland Steel in the fifties. You see, itstarted in New York, with J.H. Whitney, probably in the late forties, theconcept of venture capital, and the term was beginning to get coined. When,exactly, I don’t know, but I know clearly that it was a pretty well-known termon the East Coast. And then General Doriot is credited with starting the firstventure capital company in Boston, and that started well before Draper,Gaither & Anderson. Draper, Gaither & Anderson in 1958 or ’59. I thinkAmerican Research and Development, which was Doriot’s, was maybe midfifties, something like that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, and I read a short interview with Benno [C.] Schmidt, [Sr.] who ofcourse, was working with Jock Whitney, and he claims that he started theterm. And I believe that was the late fifties, or maybe even the forties. Soyou’re absolutely right. Draper: So when we got out here, the term wasn’t known. You’re right. It wasn’tknown in the West at all. The term wasn’t used and my wife was describingwhat I did as private banking.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] Did Draper, Gaither & Anderson use that term? Draper: Oh, sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: They thought of themselves as venture capitalists. Draper: Definitely. We knew at the time we were the first venture capital company inthe West. But we were maybe the third in the country. The Rockefellers wasreally family money. I would say they were doing venture capital with familymoney, but it wasn’t what has become a traditional venture capital company,with professionals. Doriot really had that and Jock Whitney and Benno.Benno’s father is the one that was the partner, also named Benno. Benno [C.Schmidt, Jr.] became president of Yale, and as a matter of fact, I went on theboard of trustees at the time he was president of Yale. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: In my mind, a venture capitalist is associated with high technology. But was itperhaps any business that had potential? Or were you thinking high tech? Draper: High tech. Yes, but it wasn’t called high tech, it was technology. It was peoplewith a new idea. It was often called special situations. General Anderson,when he talked about our investments, he’d talk about special situations.Venture capital became more and more the common term as we progressed.Did you get that Business Week article?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. Draper: I think it’ll say venture capital in that right there.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, it does. Draper: So we were totally focused on technology. In fact, I went over— Chinn Hohad approached Anderson, and he sent me over to Hawaii to look at acondominium. Didn’t I tell you that story?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. Draper: So I got called on the carpet by the Rockefellers. “Hey, you’re there to backtechnology companies, not real estate.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you had your hand slapped.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Tell me a little bit more about the SBIC. I read that one reason that Genstarwas brought into the picture was because the SBIC had a financial limit; thatyou could only have a fund of a certain size. Draper: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You just simply wanted more money to work with? Draper: Yes. We wanted more money to work with. We had a big name and we had asmall pocket book. [laughs] That’s the essence of it. And so because we werethe only ones in the valley to go to—these young companies couldn’t go to the bank to borrow the money, so we were the new kid on the block, newinstitution on the block, to do venture capital. So skipping ahead to Sutter Hill, we went to Genstar to get significant capital.Significant in those days was $10 million. We got $10 million from Genstar.It was a big company that managed cement and housing and tugboats on bothcoasts. It was a big Canadian company. But this was kind of an out-of-theordinary thing, to invest in venture capital. But the young president of it likedthe idea. I had heard about it from a classmate of mine, Charlie Mayer, whohad worked at Société Générale de Belgique which owned Genstar. And so I met with the chairman of the board of Société and said, “We needmore money, and Charlie had suggested you might be interested in investingin technology.” Because Charlie had come out to stay with me and my wife,just on a personal visit, and he said, “If you ever need more money, we’re inthe market to get into more technology.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that a very forward-looking idea for a big corporation at that time? Draper: Yes. Well, I’ll explain. It made a big difference in their situation, because theyhad this kind of earnings—very choppy and kind of flat, but growing. Not flat,but it was very cyclical, and not the kind of growth that technology companiescan provide— and I will say that with quotes, because technology servicesand products can be worthless, too, if not properly commercialized. So I was told by the chairman of Société Générale de Belgique that they do alltheir North American investments through Genstar, so talk to the president ofGenstar. So I went up to Montreal and met with the young president there,Angus [A.] MacNaughton—who, by the way, lives in the Bay Area, if youever want to interview him. Angus came out to visit us and look at our variousmillion of it. The investment, on the day it was announced, made the frontpage of the Wall Street Journal. So a $10 million investment was a big deal inthose days—something on the order of 1969, I guess, something like that.Maybe earlier than that. No, I think it was 1969. Except for the first three years, which were flat—there was kind of a recessionthat occurred in the early seventies, and we were all flat in our evaluations.But Genstar, with their $6 million investment, according to AngusMacNaughton—you can check the exact figure, but I think he said that theymade three-quarters of a billion dollars out of it. Three-quarters of a billiondollars on a $6 million investment.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That’s amazing. 30 Draper: The reason it was great for that company is it received these “bluebirds,” callthem. The good investments that we would pass out as we got them, would fillin their earnings, so they looked like a growth company. Yet they were onlyreally a cement company and a housing company. And then they got takenover by, I think, British Tobacco. They did a leveraged buyout or some kindof a buyout of that company. The new investor in Genstar didn’t want venturecapital; they just wanted the basic industry. So they made a big mistake. Andso MIT, Yale, Princeton, and [short pause] Stanford—I guess it was Stanford.Yale, Princeton, MIT, at least those three took over. I don’t know whenStanford came in, maybe a little later. But they took the whole position. Andit’s one of the best investments. Sutter Hill is still in Yale’s portfolio. Yale hasthe best record of all the universities in the country for endowment.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right, I’ve read that. Draper: And part of that is because of venture capital; part of it is because they payattention and Sutter Hill continues to have something like a 35 to 40 percentIRR.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Impressive. Draper: Meaning return on investment.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What control did Genstar put on Sutter Hill? Draper: Good question. We were right down here, across the street over here at theAlcoa Building. It used to be called the Alcoa Building. And we were atCooley Crowley Gaither’s office, [with] our lawyer. Angus MacNaughtonwas out here to sign the $10 million check and the agreement. We had theagreement all done, but he said, “I think we need some form of check on yourinvestment. Call it like a veto opportunity.” So we said, “Well, let us caucus.”So he went out of the room. And I talked to this wonderful old guy, EdHuddleson, who was a wonderful senior partner at Cooley. He did all theDraper, Gaither & Anderson legal work, and he did mine in Sutter Hill. Andhe said, “I think you ought to tell him—” And he talked this way. [imitatingHuddleson] “I think, Bill, you ought to just tell him that maybe he’s not readyfor venture capital.” So we called Angus back in. Angus was a year or twoyounger than I am. Still is. [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It usually works that way!  Draper: Yes. Usually does. So Angus came in and I said, “Angus, maybe you’re justnot ready for venture capital.” “Oh, no, no, no.” [laughs] So all of a sudden,the cards turned and he signed it. Although when he signed the agreement, hissignature—his name is MacNaughton; you’d think you’d see some Ms andCs. All you see is this big circular thing. It’s just a bunch of zeroes inside it.And so I said, “Wait a minute, is that your signature?” And it is, to this day,the same signature. Anyway, I walked away with a $10 million check in my hands [laughs] outhere. It was one of the most exciting days of my life. With Paul Wythes—thetwo of us walked over to the bank and had—[laughs] $10 million. That was inthe Wall Street Journal the next day. So that was the start of really significantinvestments and money. We hired two young guys, Len [G. Leonard] Baker,Jr. and Dave [David L.] Anderson. One MIT, Dave, and—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right away you did this? Draper: Well, within six months.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes—because you had some money now. Draper: Within six months or a year. Yes, we needed to strengthen our staff, as well asadding to the money.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you thinking of any particular sector for investment? Draper: Not really. But the semiconductor set off a whole chain of new products—andtransistor before that. And so then things came along. So when I was atDraper, Gaither & Anderson, I put money in something called CorbinFarnsworth. A guy named Elliott Farnsworth started the first defibrillatorcompany in the world. The first. And it’s still in business. They were sold toMedtronic. But things were beginning to happen here in Silicon Valley. We ended upbacking LSI Logic, which became a big semiconductor company. I made aspeech down in Los Angeles to some convention that was interested inventure capital. And at the end of it, a guy named Wilf [Wilfred J.] Corrigancame up to me and said, “I want to start a new company.” And so we backedhim, but it was more money than Sutter Hill wanted to put in. So KleinerPerkins was in business at that point, and so was Mayfield [Fund]. And I’mnot sure whether Mayfield invested, I think Kleiner did. I know they did. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that a new idea? Draper: The semiconductor? Well, he had worked at Fairchild, and he was startingout— Oh, you mean sharing the—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I mean the syndicating, yes. Draper: I think that was pretty new. And we were beginning to form like a little club,where we trusted each other. Another startup company we all backed togetherwas Hybritech, which probably saved my life.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What do you mean by that? Draper: It was a big financial win. But more important, it came up with the test forprostate cancer, the PSA test. And that was also backed by Kleiner and byothers. That was down in San Diego. So we worked together a good bit.Today, the venture capital industry is a little less friendly. It’s morecompetitive, because the funds have gotten so big they want to put a lot ofmoney out. In our case, we were small and we needed to shore it up in orderto get the wherewithal to give Wilf Corrigan enough to start up LSI Logic orBill Poduska enough for Apollo Computer, etc.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, does Draper Richards tend to syndicate? Draper: We do, yes. We tend to, because we’re even smaller. I don’t have any outsidelimited partners, so all the money is mine and Robin Richards’s. And sowe’ve got about forty companies, but we couldn’t finance all those ourselves,so yes. But we do the startup phase and we do some follow-on. We put inmaybe a million dollars in the first round and end up with two million in thecompany or something. In those cases, we would have about the samenumbers, as a matter of fact. But of course, times were different, and itbought—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Went much further. Draper: Went much further.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: When you were syndicating through Sutter Hill, did you usually insist onbeing the lead investor?  Draper: Oh, yes, I would say. But we didn’t talk too much about lead investor. Yes,we would round up the money. We’d call Kleiner and Mayfield, “Do youwant to come in and share the deal and look at it?” And yes, we’ll all go in. Sowe didn’t talk about our being a lead and you do it my way. And in fact, itwasn’t much of a term sheet. The term sheet often was just a [laughs] handwritten thing. We would often just have the terms laid out on a piece of yellowpaper, and then call Cooley and say draw up the agreement.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, tell me what would be on that piece of yellow paper. Draper: Oh, the amount of money that we were going to put in, the price per share thatwe’d pay, the number of extra options that would be available to newmanagement and options available to the current management. Sometimeswe’d make a loan and an equity investment together. Or sometimes it wouldbe a convertible loan for the whole thing. I don’t think we used preferredstock as much as we do today. Well, each one was a little different. I’ll give you an example. Three peoplecame into my office and wanted to start up a company called Activision,which was a game company.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now, this is Sutter Hill? Draper: Yes. I got a fourth to manage it, because the three of them, all they wanted todo was design games. I asked one of them, “Well, what do you want to do inthe long term in your life?” “All I want to do the rest of my life is to makegames!” And he meant it. [<|endoftext|>
Interviewer laughs] And for all I know, he’s still doingit. There was a company called Atari.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, I remember. Draper: And Atari had the control sticks on a television set, and they had the gamecalled Pong. And you’d go bing-bing-bing-bing, back and forth. So we usedthe Atari setup and made games for them. Not for them, but for anybody thatowned an Atari. Basically, it was like an early computer, in a way. Controlmechanisms. And so I got one guy—Jim Levy—I think he’d been with TimeWarner. Anyway, he came out and wanted a job to run a company. And so Isaid, “Why don’t you meet with these guys?” I said, “Well, how much are youable to put in?” Well, of course, they were able to put in, let’s call it $10,000each. Or nothing. Or something. Well, I said, “Look, why don’t we do it thisway? You put in $30,000, $10,[000] each.” And Jim Levy was going to put ina little more, because he could. So you ended up with $50,000. “We’ll put up $50,000 as stock, and we’ll go fifty-fifty on the company. We’ll each own a50 percent ownership.” But the company needs, call it $500,000, so we’ll putin the other $450,000 on a long-term note. And that’s the kind of thing. Or thenote might be convertible to another 10 percent of the company or something.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now, was that new, that idea? Draper: I used that a little more than it’s used today, and it was relatively new butnothing is new under the sun. Remember Queen Isabella was the first venturecapitalist.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. There’s always a precedent. Draper: But yes, I would say it was a good way to put everybody on the same terms.They’ve got a little skin in the game, a little of their own money, and they owna little more of the company than they could if we put all the money in. Theyknew that, and it kind of leveraged their position. So in those days, thereweren’t many of us, and there were more opportunities in relation to today,where today there is a lot of money and not that many good new ideas.Although there’s still a lot. So I tend to agree that more money creates more ideas. But the proportion haschanged, so that an entrepreneur that came in today would say, “We want togive up only 30 percent of the company for the $500,[000]. ” Except now it’dbe for $5 million. So there’s a little bit of difference there. The entrepreneur isin a stronger bargaining position than he was. However, in those days, hemade a lot of money, we made a lot of money. We were more on the sameside than they are today, I think. I just had a good feeling about those days.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I think this is a critical juncture that we’re talking about, beginning withDraper, Gaither & Anderson and going on through Sutter Hill. But it makesme wonder. An entrepreneur with a good idea, before there was Draper,Gaither or any of these other early companies, what did he do? Where did hiscapital come from? Draper: Sometimes it would be family money. There was a family that owned—and Ithink it was called Sequoia Wire [and Cable Company]. A guy named Paul[M.] Cook worked for them, and that money came from a family. Then PaulCook left and started Raychem, which General Anderson had financed. ButRaychem was really a big hit here. It was shrinkable tubing on wire, so thatyou could put a loose plastic around wire and then warm it, heat it. [imitatingsound of plastic shrinking] Sh-sh-sh-sh, and it shrinks up, grabs that cabletight. It was a great idea, and it’s a big company still today. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And that’s an insulation device? Draper: Yes. So my point in saying that is, I think that original—not Raychem,because that was started because the venture capital came from Anderson. ButSequoia Wine, the original company, I think, was family money. So if youdidn’t have some family that just said, “Well, here, take a chance.” My dad, in1929, before the crash, had the opportunity. He got a bonus from Dillon,Read, his investment banking firm that he worked [for], was a partner in—gota nice bonus at Christmastime. Things were all good in 1929, everything wassailing high. So he got an opportunity to put this bonus to work as either paying off themortgage that he had on our house in Scarsdale, New York, or to invest in acoffee machine that came out of Germany, I think. He invested in the coffeemachine, which of course went bankrupt, and had to work like hell all throughthe Depression. He just barely held on, in order to pay our mortgage. So thatwas a way that people got money. An entrepreneur would go to others, let’ssay investment bankers, or a commercial banker, or some rich individual, andtry to get support. So I think that was the way it went. Very informally, veryad hoc.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were the East Coast sources, such as the Whitneys and the other rich families,were they— Draper: They were available, but they were very small.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: They were investing in the West? Draper: No, not that I know of. No.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So what does this mean for innovation in what we call Silicon Valley, havingnow what is, for the West anyway, a pretty new source of money for youngcompanies with bright ideas? It seems to me a big change. Draper: That’s right. But are you saying what does it mean now?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: No, I mean what did it mean then. Draper: I think it meant eureka! [<|endoftext|>
Interviewer laughs] It meant my God! There’s an enginefor the growth, for the potential, for the innovation. Varian brothers was coming out with the first MRI, magnetic resonance. Nobody knew what thepotential was, but of course, it turned into something everybody has to havewhen your knees begin to creak. I saw the first laser here. As I told you, westarted up the first defibrillator company. And of course, now, where one formof technology talks to another, the acceleration is enormous. So the next tenyears, twenty, thirty years, you’re going to see dramatic growth in all kinds ofscientific breakthroughs. A lot around health, and you know about that, and alot around public transportation, probably in communications.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: If I’m catching you right, you’re saying that it’s more than just the fact thatthere’s a big pool of money. It’s the fact that one technology, one businessplays upon another. Draper: That’s exactly right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And builds in an exponential way? Draper: Yes, that’s right. That’s exactly right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is that a well known idea? Draper: I don’t know. I’m sure it’s not original, but it’s true. It’s clear, as you can see.The computer itself made things possible that just were not possible before.And so that computer is able to do mathematical computations so rapidly thatthe human brain couldn’t keep up. It would have taken an army to do itlonghand. Then when that started to happen, then it could be applied to certaintechnical problems that gave other breakthroughs. You know what? The timemachine—seems a little crazy, that you can go backwards and forwards intime. But when you grasp a very simple thought that if we can make amachine that can go faster than light, and then we can make a door and climbinto that machine, we can go with it, faster than light, and we can go forwardand backward into time.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is there anybody working on that? Draper: Stephen Hawking is the guy—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh! [laughs]  Draper: —that gave me that thought. He gave a lecture that Intel produced out here,and he gave a lecture with his two fingers. The most captivating lecture I’veever attended, and that was one of the parts of it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Really? Well, we diverted from Sutter Hill. You mentioned Paul Wythes—were you meeting him for the first time in Sutter Hill? Why Paul Wythes? Draper: He was a very close friend of Greg [Gregor C.] Peterson’s. Greg Peterson andhis brother-in-law started Sutter Hill real estate company. Greg was in thesame class as Paul. I’m not actually sure what Paul did straight out of businessschool.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Paul went to Princeton, didn’t he? Draper: Yes, went to Princeton and Stanford Business School, and they wereclassmates at Stanford Business School. Greg hired Paul before I knew him,and then Pitch and I talked to Frank Lodato. I knew Frank better than Greg,but I knew them both. Their company was very small. They had a secretary;we didn’t [laughs] have a secretary. They had a Xerox machine and we didn’t.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [laughs] It got down to that level? Draper: Yes, almost like that. So we put our two companies together. Oh, but theimportant thing was, they wanted to go into venture capital, beside the realestate. So Greg found out about the SBIC program and got a license, and hehired Paul to help him with the SBIC. They made one or two deals before wecame together with them, but they were pretty inexperienced. I had had threeyears of venture capital.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you knew a little more. Draper: And three more years with Pitch. So yes, I knew a lot more. We had doneprobably a dozen deals in Draper and Johnson. So I became president. Paul’sa little younger, five years younger. I became president, he was vice presidentof the SBIC, and that’s how it all fit. And then he and I conceived of SutterHill Ventures, to make it a partnership, raise more money—paid off the SBIC,paid off the government, sold the SBIC to Genstar in the package, in thetransaction, so that Genstar bought it for fair value. They got a good dealthere, too. So they, in a sense, closed up the SBIC, and we just had thepartnership money. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. But it seems to me from what you’ve been saying that the SBIC, eventhough it had its limitations—and there may have been others, other than thefinancial limit that we talked about—got people thinking in this way. Draper: It got us into business. Well, Pitch wouldn’t have come into it, because hewouldn’t have known about it; he was in the steel business. But it got me,with $25,000 to my name, into the business, because we got $300,000together.[End Audio File 3]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I believe you were going to make a comment about the place of the SBIC inthe history of venture capital. Draper: Yes. Eisenhower had the administration that came up with the idea of a smallbusiness investment company. And I think it was the [Small BusinessInvestment Company] Act of 1958.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You’re right. Draper: It was a bonanza for me, in that I never would’ve gotten into venture capital.Pitch Johnson wouldn’t have either, because I brought him into it. There areother people who never used the SBIC program. But for me, it made thedifference between not being able to do it, not having the money. Because itwas a risky kind of a business, I didn’t want to go out and ask friends to[laughs] put money into this crazy business. Most people didn’t know theterminology. So I give a lot of credit to the fact that the SBA gave me a loan of ten years,and $2 for every dollar that I put in, at 5 percent interest. That made thedifference for me to be able to commit my little $25,000 to going into givingentrepreneurs a chance to show what they could do. So they did a great job.Unfortunately, what happened to the SBIC program, they changed it slightly.It used to be straight loan and low interest. As the dollars got bigger—severalbillions of dollars went through the SBIC program—as that happened, andthey started thousands of these SBICs, and the bubble began to build up inventure capital in the technology world, they had a different system, whichwas a partnership system. Some people invested in it and took a few winnersout of the company and left the high-risk things in there. And it left the SBAholding the bag. And it wasn’t properly done. This was during that period ofthe late nineties. The SBA lost most of the $2 billion that they put in there. Now, how many companies and how much money was generated because ofthe money that that SBIC program was responsible for, I don’t know. Butprobably vastly more than the $2 billion that was lost. So I’m a bigenthusiastic supporter of that program. And then later, when Robin Richards and I started Draper International—Icame back from public service, from the Export-Import Bank, and fromworking at the UN—having worked in the government, I knew about theOverseas Private Investment [Corporation] company—very similar to theSBIC program. Except the concept there was that it was designed to enhancethe incentive for people to invest in developing countries. So I, having worked, as I say, at the UN and at the Export-Import Bank, Iwanted to do something international. We can talk about this later. But it doesconnect, in that when we started that up—as, again, something of anexperiment, to go to India with a venture capital program—I knew about theOPIC program. And having been successful with the SBIC program, I said,“Let’s go talk to OPIC about helping us invest in India.” 1994. We were thefirst venture capital company to go to India. Bar none. Of course now, thereare many, many, many of them. So that was really exciting, and theyleveraged our—. And our returns were something like sixteen times [snapsfingers] the limited partners’ money. They got sixteen times their money back,in six years. That was just a lot of lucky timing, a lot of lucky deals. But it wasalso the leverage that was supplied by the US government, the OPIC. So I have great respect for programs that will leverage, free of a lot of redtape, government programs that will leverage investments, the decisions beingmade by other people. But they can’t do it the way they changed the program,where they allow it as a partnership. They didn’t have a debt anymore andthey couldn’t collect on the debt. They were a partner in a program where theoperators were able to take money out and leave the government holding thebag. That wasn’t good. In this program, the whole concept is that we pay backthe government before we make any money. We owe a debt, and that debt’sgot to be paid before we make money. That’s the way it should work.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, let’s pick up on this leveraging theme as we talk about your lateractivities, because I have a feeling it’s going to enter in the Export-ImportBank. But I still haven’t finished with Sutter Hill. [laughs] Draper: Right, go ahead.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, you mentioned Paul Wythes and how you met him. I’m wonderingabout personalities and whether that came into the equation at all. The littlethat I know is that the two of you are fairly different in personality, andhence—and this is a guess on my part—in how you go about investing. 40 Draper: I don’t think so. Paul is more cautious, and I’m more of a risk taker, that’strue. But we both knew the importance of quality people—and that’s basic inventure. You’ve got to have people you trust. But more than that, people thatyou feel have the brainpower, the vision, the energy, the commitment to makesomething big. And all of those elements are really important, and I think Paulsees that just like I do. We didn’t have much difference of opinion on qualitypeople. That’s where you might fall apart and have problems in decidingwhether to do one thing or do another. But you’re right. I’m more likely to take a risk and not worry if it fails,because one hit, like an LSI Logic or a Corbin-Farnsworth—or in more recentterms, when I backed Skype. That paid for the entire portfolio, and it was asmall investment, but it returned a thousand times as much money. And soyou don’t worry. My attitude is you really cut to the chase, and you take risksif the potential is big. But if you don’t see a ten-for-one return, potentially,you probably shouldn’t even do it. You probably ought to just hold on to yourmoney.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So maybe that was what you were going on, because it seems to me that whenyou were first starting out, you didn’t have that kind of experience yet. Draper: No, I was more cautious. When I started with Pitch, we were cautious. Webacked a guy who had a check-weighing machine that tossed packages outthat were underweight, at high speed. It was an automation kind of a thing. Aguy named Joe Guili was the president of it, and Pitch and I bought 25 percentof the company for $60,000—and the company, I think, was doing a couplemillion dollars in sales—maybe not, but—it was a pretty good sized company!But things were different in those days. Valuations were lower. We wouldalways value the thing on the upside, one time sales. Now some can pay tentimes sales and not be worried. I’m worried, but value is in the eye of thebeholder. I’d say I was much more cautious in those days, because we couldnot afford to lose our money. You’re right. And yet we were taking risks onnew businesses. But if you back the right person, he’ll get you out of a bumbusiness, a bum product idea, a bum service idea, and move you into a betterone. If you back the wrong person with a great idea, you never get anywhere,because he just bumbles and fumbles.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So the people come first. Draper: So people come first, in my eyes, and I’ve always been very much that way. Ithink Paul felt much the same way. He has a mechanical engineeringbackground, but he wasn’t a driven engineer or he wouldn’t have been a venture capitalist, he’d be designing chips or something. So we got along verywell.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How much did you know that in advance? How much of a risk were youactually taking in going to Sutter Hill? Draper: But you know, you’re young, and you’re thirty-two years old, and you can’tgo wrong. You know you’re not going to fail. You just know it. [<|endoftext|>
Interviewerlaughs] So that’s important. Age has a lot to do with it. A good education. So Iknew quality people. I owe a lot to Yale and Harvard, because I met qualitypeople along the way. Scarsdale High School was high quality. So all the way,I’d been mixing it up with quality people. When a jerk came in, I knew itpretty fast.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You have the reputation of having a strong intuition about people. Draper: Yes, that’s true. I think that does come through. I know I hear that, too. I havea good feel for people. And matching people up. That’s important. Like thesethree guys that started Activision. They needed that fourth guy, who didn’twant to make games [laughs] the rest of his life. And he needed them. Youneeded a combination of people that would fit together, because sometimesthey’re just like oil and water and you can’t make them mix.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: There are a lot of things underlying all this, but it seems, also, that to be asuccessful venture capitalist, you have to be a people person. Because it’s notonly assessing people, it’s making things happen by drawing other people intoyour concept. Draper: I would say you’re right, if I didn’t know better. [laughter] In other words, Idon’t know many people who would describe Arthur Rock as a people person.Arthur Rock is a very intelligent guy who is a very successful venturecapitalist, but he’s not warm and fuzzy. He’s married to a warm and fuzzy gal.He’s smart enough to do that, and he also has a good feel for people, too, Ithink. A feel for it—but you don’t have to be warm and fuzzy. I would sayDon Valentine is not warm and fuzzy. He’s hardnosed, and very strict, tough,cut it off and—yet he knows marketing. See, Don knows marketing. He cameout of Intel marketing and knew the technology and the marketing, and thatcombination is very good in this field. Tom Perkins, I don’t think most peoplethink of him as warm and fuzzy.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. I wasn’t necessarily meaning warm and fuzzy. I guess I was moremeaning making things happen between people.  Draper: I think all of those people can do that, and are good at that. No, you’re right.They know where to put the pressure on and where to ease up, yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: In the end—and this is looking at it very crassly—money speaks. If you’recoming to a venture capitalist and you need the money to get your businessgoing, you’re probably going to have to have a very good reason not toagree—there’s the money, there’s the experience. Draper: That’s true. Well, a big part of a venture capitalist’s job is to coach theentrepreneur. It’s lonely at the top, as they say. The entrepreneur really wantssome coaching, very often, if it’s his first shot at running a company. Hedoesn’t want an over-hanging, overwhelming kind of a personality pushinghim, but he wants to know if he’s going in the right direction, where he shouldput his energy, wants to play off ideas. He has personnel problems among hisown staff—he has nobody to talk to in the staff. And so the venture capitalistcan perform a big service there, to being the coach or listening board for theCEO.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You can maybe lump that together under the term governance? Draper: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Stepping in and managing, or helping to manage companies. Was thatsomething that went back to Draper, Gaither & Anderson? Draper: Yes. Of course, I had good training at Inland Steel about how a big successfulcompany works. So I saw it—from a very low level, sales and sales manager.You kind of get it along the way as you go. I’m sure Joe Guili ofIllumitronics, our first investment, had a few laughs. Pitch Johnson and I,were aged thirty, and he was probably forty-five—he thought, well, these guysare [laughs] a little bit young to give me advice. But we would put thepressure on when we’d look at the numbers that did not meet expectations. It’sa kind of a relationship that builds as you begin to be tested and find thatyou’ve got good judgment or that they have faith in your ideas. But if I go ona board now, and it’s a young guy, he’s typically, as you say, very willing tolisten. And I’ve, by the way, got to be careful of that. Somebody like Bill Bowes is really good at listening. He’s very taciturn,doesn’t speak up aggressively or anything. He waits to be asked his advice,and then he just nails the subject perfectly. In other words, he’s a guy that Iwould go to for advice. He’s very intelligent, and he’s very cautious aboutjumping in when he doesn’t have all the facts. Lots of people in board meetings demonstrate their egos. You come across all kinds. I’ve been onthousands of boards, hundreds, anyway. You find people who want to talk justto listen to themselves talk. That gets to be a problem, a management problemfor the CEO. Try to get that person off the board, is his thought [chuckling].Or at least not have him dominate a board meeting. We pay a lot of attentionto the board management.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was this a new way of looking at investment? That it wasn’t just a matter ofputting money into a company, it was also a matter of building a company.Was that new? Draper: I think that was not new to Doriot. Doriot felt building a company was what itwas all about. Might’ve been new to some of the investment bankers in NewYork, when they thought about a quick transaction. Investment bankers oftendon’t make very good venture capitalists, because they think of thetransaction. They want to make it into a transaction. Turn it, flip it. They callit flipping the company now. You buy in and you sell it quickly. But the guyswho make the most money are builders. Arthur Rock, in Intel, wasinstrumental in his advice to the management team there, as they came out ofFairchild and were starting up on their own. He was an investment banker. SoI shouldn’t generalize. But some investment bankers just want to do the dealand move on. How do we flip this? And how do cash out, before they worryabout building the company.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But that was never the idea for any of those early partnerships that you wereassociated with? There was always the idea that we’re in this for the longterm, to build a company. Draper: Oh, yes. We knew they were long-term investments. It was never that we weregoing to sell it out next year. You just don’t do well if you have that attitude.You’re not really creating anything significant. It doesn’t give you anypleasure, either, if you’re just trying to flip it fast.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All through these two conversations we’ve had so far, I’ve noticed how oftenyou’re using what could be called social networks, your connections withpeople. Maybe it’s growing as you move from Draper, Gaither & Andersonthrough Draper Johnson, and finally to Sutter Hill Ventures—that if one isgoing to advise a new company in a full sense, it means knowing a lot aboutwho is out there to help. I mean in terms of banking, employment—all thethings that go into building a company. Draper: Exactly. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How did you make those connections—or did you—in those early days? Draper: We had a big Rolodex, and we literally had this Rolodex machine with thecards, and we’d just flip through, pre-computer. So you just use the Rolodex,and you’d look up—what was that guy’s name? And so accountants andlawyers and advisers of marketing, public relations people—you begin tobuild them as you go. So the first investment you make, with Joe Guili andIllumitronics, he’s not likely to get a hell of a lot from us, because we’re earlyin the game. We know a few people in the steel business, but that doesn’t helphim much [chuckling]. I had had three years of gathering some connections,and so on, at Draper, Gaither & Anderson, but it wasn’t like it would be today,or when I was right in the center of the Sutter Hill days, when we had just allkinds of people that wanted to know us. The head of Goldman Sachs cameinto our office at Sutter Hill. We were new. Venture capital was new. ButGoldman Sachs knew something was going on out here, and so he came out.That was kind of an eye opener, [laughs] because we thought, my God! Wedidn’t have offices any bigger than this one.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So it’s happening in many ways. You’re going out and finding the people youneed, but as you become known, people are coming to you. Draper: Yes, then they come to us, that’s true. It works both ways. That’s a goodobservation.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How did people think about Sutter Hill Ventures in those days? Draper: You can ask other people what they thought and think today. Not verydifferent from what it is today, except I think it was more on the forefront thanit is. There’re so many more competitors now. But it was thought to be veryhigh quality, friendly people who were very professional and straightforward.What we used to do, every entrepreneur that came in, gave them a list with thetelephone numbers of everybody we had invested in, so that they could callany of them. And we didn’t call to say, “You tell them this or that.” Becausewe were very proud of our reputation, because it was always oriented towardtrying to support the entrepreneur and be a friend, and be honest andstraightforward with them, as well as help them get farther down the line.Now, that doesn’t mean we didn’t have arguments and disagreements atdifferent times with different management teams, but there was a quality lookto us. We had hired Len Baker. I think he graduated second in his class at StanfordBusiness School. He was a Yale mathematics major. We hired DaveAnderson, who was an MIT graduate, and a very soft, sweet, friendly personality. The four of us ran it for the length of time until I went toWashington. When I left, a couple of people came on. But it was really a goodfirm. It would have been ranked—anybody that named the top three firmswould’ve named Sutter Hill. I would say every third person would’ve namedit as the best. So I would say the others were Kleiner—and Mayfield was wellthought of early on and has lost a little of its luster, but God, it’s such a bigfield now.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Would Sutter Hill be up there today? Draper: Yes. It would, for the investors that know it, like you talk to Yale, you talk toMIT, Stanford. Well, I’ll give you a specific. My partner Howard Hartenbaumtalked to the guy that runs the Princeton endowment. Howard said, “Whowere the best companies that you invested in, in the venture world?” He said,“There are only two that have the very best records.” He said, “Sutter Hill andSequoia.” And they’re in tons of them, Kleiner and many others. NEA and allthe others. So they still have a very superb reput[ation]. But they don’t do anyPR. And it’s very “come to me” kind of thing. It’s not reaching out to try andbe in the news or getting Colin Powell to be your limited partner. That kind ofthing. They don’t do that—and the general partners own more than half thefirm now. The limited partners, it’s just a money machine. [laughs] They do itright, they do it carefully, they do it very slowly. They’re not risk takers, inthe sense that I am by myself, in other words. I think it would be a bigger firmtoday, probably, if I were still there, but it wouldn’t be a better firm. I thinkit’s great. I’m a limited partner of it, in a small way. But they’re really neatpeople. Every one of them. A guy who was Tim’s classmate is running it. Myson’s classmate from Harvard Business School is Tench Coxe. Bill Youngerand Tench run the firm. They have a great team. It’s a wonderful group ofpeople.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You mentioned last time that Sutter Hill was an early investor in Hybritech? Draper: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I believe Hybritech was the first monoclonal antibody company. Draper: Yes. PSA test. We sold the company to [Eli] Lilly, and Lilly continued togrow. I held onto that stock, and it was a really good one.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you remember that deal in any specifics? Because that was a radically newtechnology.  Draper: I know it was, and it was not because of anything that I knew about thattechnology. I wasn’t the point guy on that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It was Byers, wasn’t it? Draper: Yes. Brook Byers. He was with—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Kleiner Perkins. Draper: At Sutter Hill, maybe it was Dave Anderson. I’m not sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was Kleiner the lead investor? Draper: Well, I told you we didn’t have that. We all went in with about the sameamount of money, typically.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Nowadays, when you say lead investor, does that usually imply that moremoney was put in by that firm?million, and I wanted two others to each put in $2 million. I might be the leadinvestor because I negotiated the deal, I set up the board, but I asked you guysto come on, so I might be given that title today, I suppose, I don’t know.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I think we should stop after Sutter Hill, but I want to give you a chance to sayanything more about Sutter Hill that we may have missed. Draper: Sutter Hill was a great experience. I was at Sutter Hill for twenty years. I feltthat it was a real contribution to the area, to the industry, and I think it was abig part of my legacy. The other thing about Sutter Hill is I would be willingto bet that the return on investment is higher than any other venture capitalcompany in the country.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you think? Draper: Don’t know the statistics, but I’m pretty sure of that. Princeton seems tohave—Yale will tell you definitely it’s the best. But as I said, I was a trustee ofYale, and I was on the advisory committee for Dave [David F.] Swensen, who’s brilliant in his management of the endowment. You can see I ambiased.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I think we should stop there for today, because we’re now ready tomove into different territory. Draper: Good. Okay.[End of Interview]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Last time—unless you have more thoughts on the subject—we concluded withSutter Hill. I believe that the next step in your life was the run for Congress? Draper: Oh, well, that was in the middle of Sutter Hill [laughs]. I took a very shorttime, because as it turned out, I didn’t win it. Shirley Temple [Black] didn’twin, either. We split the more conservative vote, and [Paul Norton] PeteMcCloskey, [Jr.] won a plurality. It’s a very good thing for me that he did,because I don’t think it would’ve been a good time for me. I still hadn’t madea big enough splash in venture capital, and I still was looking at the future. Itmight have changed my—who knows what would have happened? Butanyway, the point is, it was a special election. I think the congressman diedsomewhere in the summer. Anyway, the election was taking place inNovember, a special election. It was about a three-month race or somethinglike that. Quite unlike [Barack] Obama and [Hillary] Clinton today. God, thatgoes on and on! Those poor people! But I loved the experience of running.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why was that? Draper: Oh! It was spectacular! It’s a very humbling experience for anyone whoplunges into the public issues and knows as little as I did. There were aboutten in the race, but the three of us that came up on top all knew each other—one from Hillsborough, one from Atherton, and one from Woodside, I think.The three of us were all thirty-nine years old. We were in Time magazinebecause of Shirley Temple. It was watched nationally, just because of her. Bythe way, I just saw she’s just about to turn eighty, and there’s an article in theSunday New York Times about her. There’s a new DVD that’s come out—about her later life, maybe, I don’t know. She became an ambassador to theCzech Republic. We had a lot of fun, all three of us. But the problem was, Vietnam was the hot issue. The only issue. And so wewould go to a school auditorium and there’d be ten of us in a row there, allwith a minute and a half to tell, [laughs] in brief, what we felt should be doneabout Vietnam. Should we finish the job? Pete McCloskey, I think with themajority of the electorate, said, “Pull the plug, go home, get out of Vietnam.”Shirley and I were saying, well, let’s finish the job and not pull out. I went toVietnam during the election. [laughs] Probably not a very brilliant politicalmove, because it was a period that was pretty critical getting around, and Itook about a week. It’s amazing how important one week is in a short race.When I saw that it was the big issue I thought I’d better go find out on myown—at least be sure of my ground and at least know the ground. So I felt sure and I got to know the ground, but it was an arguable issue, and Iwas in the minority, I think, along with Shirley. Shirley was moreconservative than I was. I was kind of in the middle. Which would be a goodplace to be, ordinarily, but Pete did a very good job of just analyzing. He’s agood lawyer, and he analyzed the strategy of just pulling out. Because he wasalone, we divided the vote. But going into people’s homes and talking about their issues and theimportance of a congressman to them—it’s about a quarter of a million peoplethat you represent, at that time, anyway. It is probably three- or four-hundredthousand, maybe 500,000 now. But the experience for me was terrific. Itopened my eyes to a lot of problems and interesting facts about our county. Iran in San Mateo County.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And did it have repercussions in keeping you engaged, at least at the personallevel, in local politics? Draper: Well, it was an indication that I was interested in getting beyond venturecapital and doing something that might be outside of our own community. I’msure it was an indication—my running right there. I was asked by a couple ofgood friends, Stu Leeb and Bill [William C.] Edwards, at a breakfast atRickey’s [Restaurant], to run. The reason for that was because I was, at thattime, president of the Republican Alliance, which is a little like the LincolnClub today—professional businessmen, lawyers, and other professionals thatwere Republicans, but almost to a man, moderate Republicans. I say to a man,because I don’t know that there were any women in it those days. [laughs]Today, it would be a very different story. We’d meet and have guest speakers. Governor Reagan came up when he wasthinking of running for president and talked with us, or we’d have a senatorthat was running. It was very interesting. California was a smallerenvironment at that time. People knew each other more—or it seemed to methat way. Maybe it’s not true. But it was a very friendly, open environment, and I had a good time in that. So that’s why they thought of me for runningwhen this fellow named Congressman [Arthur] Younger died.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did the decision to run have any bearing on your feelings about venturecapital as a career? Draper: No, I knew venture capital at that point—hadn’t made much money on it. Itwas still very new at that time. We had made the Measurex deal. That was acompany I may have told you about. Dave [David A.] Bossen was coming outhere. On a vacation in Chicago, I went to call on a friend of mine who was inthe investment business, and he said, “If you’re in the venture capitalbusiness, you might want to meet up with Dave Bossen, who’s just come outto the West Coast. And so when I came back, I looked him up and helped himfind some technology people, because he wanted to do a similar thing to whathe had done for his other company, measuring the thickness and moisturecontent of paper in a paper mill, online, in real time. He didn’t have any technology, he just had the management experience, buthe was at cross purposes with the CEO. He was more or less a general—like aCOO. And so he broke away. He wanted to come to California and do it, andwent into competition with this other company. He did very, very well, and wewent on the New York Stock Exchange and eventually sold it to Honeywell.But I bring that up because I got that deal put together and raised some otherventure money, together with ours, and we had a really good experience. He’sa top flight executive, and if you have that kind of person in command, it’smuch easier being a board member and you enjoy the board meetings. In fact, we got to the point where we could go to various parts of the world,wherever they had trees, because his business involved paper and paperrequires trees. The essence of the business was to measure—paper is basicallymade out of pulp and water. You look through a piece of yellow foolscappaper, and you’ll see blotches. That means there’s more pulp in those placeswhere you see [it’s] thicker. So the thinner you make it, the more water yousell in the paper, the cheaper it is [chuckles]. But you want the consistency. Sonot necessarily very cheap paper, but whatever it is, it should be consistentand that’ll save costs, big costs, eventually. So these were big, quarter of amillion dollar machines that were doing this. And it was a lot of fun. PeteBancroft came in to Measurex. I called him and asked him if he didn’t want tojoin.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How had you known Pete Bancroft? Draper: He came to take my place when I left Draper, Gaither & Anderson, and to joinPitch Johnson. 50<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. Well, you talk with great animation about the Measurex deal. It seems tome that if you had been successful politically, it would have meant giving upventure capital, at least for a period. Draper: Oh, I would’ve given it up for good.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Would you? Draper: Oh, sure. That would’ve been a whole new career. You can’t go into Congressand then leave in two years. People who had put—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, you can if you’re not reelected. [laughs] Draper: —faith in you—you just wouldn’t do that. You can be thrown out.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That’s what I was trying to get at, whether you were contemplating a careerredirection. Draper: Absolutely. So yes, I have always had a pull toward public service, I think. Itstarted with my father, as I told you. But then that [race] indicated it more. Ofcourse, it didn’t happen. And as I say, I’m glad it didn’t, because I really wasable to establish a financial base for me and my family, which I didn’t have. Ididn’t have that much money at that point.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It seems to me because you had that financial base, you could do some publicservice, just in a different way. Draper: Sure. And so when I was asked by George Bush to join him and RonaldReagan, it was a no-brainer. I wanted to do that, to run the Export-ImportBank. And that was easy, because I had made all the money, much moremoney than I ever dreamed I would. And so I could be comfortable.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was it Measurex that gave you the financial boost? Draper: Oh, it was a whole series of companies. In fact, that was one, but it wasn’tanywhere near the biggest.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why did you leave Draper Gaither & Anderson?  Draper: I left Draper Gaither & Anderson because I wanted to do something on myown. I really did. My father was one of the three main characters, of course, asI told you, and I learned the business after three years. I brought them threevery good deals. I think Pete would tell you that the best deals were mine,which he took over.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Which are the three? Draper: I told you about the Corbin-Farnsworth. Another is Western Rubber, which Ithink I also may have briefly mentioned. For schoolyards, under jungle gyms,a rubber foam flooring, basically, that interlocked. Not a very high-tech thing,but it turned out to be a good investment. And let’s see, there was a third onethat I was involved in, and I can’t right now recall.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: In my mind, and certainly in some of the literature, venture capital is almostmarried to the concept of high technology. And yet you’ve mentioned severaldeals which really weren’t high technology; they were good companies thatneeded a jump start through venture capital. Is it misleading to pair venturecapital and high tech? Draper: Well, high tech today is a little different than high tech back in 1965. Thismeasuring the thickness of moisture in paper was very high tech. And highspeed. The Corbin Farnsworth was clearly high tech. That was the firstdefibrillator.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I was thinking of the flooring. Draper: The flooring was not. No, you’re right. That was just an opportunisticinvestment that was very high quality; it was well-run, and so on.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So it tells me, anyway, that you were looking for opportunity more or lesswherever you encountered it. Would you say that’s accurate? Draper: When Pitch and I were in business, we each leased a car. First time I knewyou could do that. You leased the car for the company, and then we bothneeded a car to go around, because we only each had one car, which our wivestook over. So we would look for something that said electronics on the nameor sounded technical. We would also respond very quickly to technologythings, but it is true that we would be happy to go into some “specialsituation,” which I mentioned General Anderson used to call the wholebusiness. Some of them were high tech and some were growth companies that were doing well, but might not have been very special technically. But thebulk of them were technical. In order to get fast growth, you didn’t go into agrocery store hoping it would be a chain. But there are those that become veryfast growing, and you find the Wal-Marts of the world. But they come alongvery seldom, and they would not be a very good investment for venturecapital.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is the next stage the Export-Import Bank, where you started in 1981? Draper: Yes. Started in 1981, knew nothing about it [chuckles], except that I knewnumbers pretty well. I’m pretty good at that. I ended up just walking into thefirst government job I had ever had. There was a friend of mine from Yale,Ray [Raymond J.] Albright. I went to see him to just ask, well, what’s thisplace like, because he was a vice president there. He explained a little about it.I knew generally the mission, which was to promote American exports andlend money to foreign countries or to foreign customers, private companies,that would buy American products. The loans were on very favorable terms.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is it in New York? Draper: No, no, it’s in Washington. It’s a government agency. It’s totally owned bythe US government, and it’s an independent agency, so we had twoRepublicans and two Democrats on the board. Whoever is chairman, whateverparty he’s with, becomes the fifth board member. Yes, I think that’s it. Itcould be that there needs to be an independent on there. But anyway, we hadthe mission of trying to promote American exports, and so I met with thepresident[s] of General Electric and Boeing, and all the big exporters werevery interested in this financial facility to help their customers buy theirproducts. I got in there, and there were a couple of experiences that were quiteinteresting. Freddie [Sir Frederick Alfred] Laker, [who] started LakerAirlines—it was a cheap airline across the ocean, between London and NewYork. He had five airplanes, and he borrowed from the Export-Import Bankbefore I got there. I first met him, and [him] being financially astute, I askedhim, “Well, how will this work, if you are selling your tickets for the Londonpassengers coming here, in pounds, and you’re paying us interest in dollars,you’re paying your depreciation on the airplanes in dollars, and you’re payingthe gasoline for fuel in dollars—and if the pound moves, you’re going to havea difficult time paying.” He said, “Bill, you don’t understand the business. Thewhole business is about filling the seats with more bloody arses.” [laughter] He had flown over to see me in my office, and then I went off to see him,particularly after I learned—we’ll call it six, eight months later—that just what I had said happened, and he got into trouble, to the point where he wasgoing into bankruptcy quick. So we ended up with five airplanes, and theywere taken immediately to the desert, down near Tucson. I think they call it agraveyard for planes. But it’s very dry air so they don’t depreciate veryquickly. They keep a lot of airplanes there that are out of service, and so allfive of them were down there. So I got a lot of talk from my staff, “You’vegot to get rid of those airplanes because we’re not meant to be holding assets.”I said, “Well, I really don’t think the market’s there. Nobody’s interested inbuying airplanes.” Right after Reagan took over, remember, the interest rates were jacked way upby [Chairman of the Federal Reserve, Paul A.] Volcker, which was the rightthing to do at that time, and it stalled the economy and there was a problem.So anyway, nobody was buying airplanes. So I just sat on them for a year orso, and the market turned rather quickly. So SAS [Scandinavian Airlines]came to us and bought three airplanes at our cost. I had not wanted to breakthe price, see. I wanted to get our full value out of it, the full market price thatwe had paid for the airplanes—Freddie Laker had paid, with our money. So Iasked SAS if they would take five. They wouldn’t. They just wanted three.But it wasn’t long before United learned about the sale, and they said, “Well,we’d like to buy the other two airplanes.” I said, “Oh, the price has gone up.”[chuckles] And so we got our interest back off those other two, but we stilldidn’t get the interest on the other three. So then it happened that I kept getting visits from the president of BritishAirways. He came over, and he said he wanted us to sign a release, because hewanted to get this whole thing cleaned up and there was some question aboutwhether Laker had been put out of business by British Airways. I said, “Well,we’d be happy to do that.” But he said something about—it just slipped outthat they were paying Freddie Laker $8 million. I said, “You’re payingFreddie Laker $8 million?” He had common stock, and we, of course, had aloan in there which was not fully paid, in the sense that we never got theinterest back. So I said, “As soon as we get our full interest back, we’d behappy to sign off, but you’re not going to pay off Freddie Laker,” which theywere doing. They were essentially paying him off so he wouldn’t sue them forputting him out of business—which I don’t think would be a legitimate suit,but it was a threat. I learned later that the reason they were so anxious to get this done was theywere trying to take British Airways private. It was then owned by thegovernment, but they wanted to go private. So I said no. So he went back, andhe kept wanting me to make a deal of something less than getting the fullamount. I’ve never had more fun with a negotiation, because I realized hereally wanted to make this deal! And he, of course, had the very fast planethat came over the— <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, Concorde. Draper: The Concorde. So he’d appear in my office about every week. [<|endoftext|>
Interviewerlaughs] I thought—things are going pretty well, so I just was very polite tohim when we had lunch or whatever, but I never budged on the price. Thenext thing I know, [Prime Minister] Maggie Thatcher is over at the WhiteHouse, and I’m getting a call from the State Department. “You’ve got to makea deal! Because this has become a matter of state politics!” I said, “Fine. Allthey have to do is pay us our full amount, and I’m happy to make a deal.”Which I knew could be done. So after a couple more trips back and forth, hesigned off. Later, a friend of mine said that there was a guy over at the State Department[who] said, “That Draper at the Export-Import Bank, he treats that money likeit’s his own money!” [laughter] That was the best compliment I got inWashington! But it worked. So we got it. And of course, everything workedfine, and British Airways went private, and we got all of our money back outof those airplanes. So that was a little vignette about business in Washington. There was a case where Egypt wanted a nuclear power plant, and they wantedus to lend money from the Export-Import Bank. We have economists there,and they were pointing out that Egypt gets their money from tourism and fromthe Suez Canal, and I think some oil. But they were not going to have enoughto pay back the big loans that it took to build a nuclear power plant. So weturned this down, we as the board of the Export-Import Bank. Well, then I gota call from the White House and they said, “Hey, this isn’t so good. We reallyought to go along with it.” Then the next thing I knew, I got called over to theWhite House, and two people over there—one was the national securityadvisor and the other was Ed Meese—they sat me down and they said, “HeyDraper,” the security advisor said, “This is a case of war or peace.” I didn’t goany further into it. I said, “Hey, if this is a case of war or peace—.” I didn’t tryto dig or say, hey, you’re crazy.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you got out of it? Draper: No, so we agreed to sign off. We agreed to make the loan to Egypt, becausethe US government wanted to help Egypt move this forward. But in theagreement—oh, the problem was that their oil in the country was not atmarket prices. They were selling their own oil at a very subsidized rate. So Igot them to agree to raise the price of oil 15 percent every year, in order to getin better position when the big payments for the nuclear power plant camealong. In the end, they never did build a nuclear power plant [chuckles]. Wemade the agreement, but they never built it. President Mubarak found it to bepolitically incorrect at that time. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And what about the loan? You never made it? Draper: No, the loan was an agreement to make the loan to buy the nuclear powerplant, but they never ended up executing it. By the way, while at the Ex-ImBank, I authorized the first loan to China. Deng Chou Ping told me of his planprovinces to “let them become rich.” Of course he was successful. Today,they’re lending us a lot more money than we ever loaned them [chuckles]. There was another interesting situation. I won’t get too technical, but I wentover to the OECD meetings, and then there was a group of other countries thathad export-import banks, promoting their own exports. Japan would come. Itwas mostly Japan and France, Germany and England. We had longnegotiations, because interest rates had gone high, but we were still charging7½ percent for our loans and interest rates were up around 12 percent, asubsidy of almost five percentage points. If you extrapolate that over twentyyears, you buy the plane for Singapore Airlines, who can afford to buy theplane anyway. The American taxpayer’s buying them the airplane. So I cameback frustrated from these meetings in Paris because they wouldn’t budge.These Europeans and the Japanese were very slow to raise their rates to nearmarket rates. They love subsidy. So I came back to Washington and I justunilaterally raised our rates.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You could do that? Draper: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You must’ve had board approval, right? Draper: Yes. But the board usually supports the chairman.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: They’re a rubber stamp? Draper: No, they’re not a rubber stamp, but we are cooperative, and I was the leader ofthe group. They understood why I wanted to do this, because it was costingthe taxpayers so damn much money, the difference in margins. But of course,there were the people that didn’t want to see this happen, the president ofBoeing, for example. So I debated T.A. [Thornton Arnold] Wilson, who wasthen the president of Boeing on the Lehrer news hour [the MacNeil/LehrerReport] and Nightline with—what’s his name? <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is that [Walter] Cronkite? Draper: No. Ted Koppel at Nightline. (I’ll tell you a story about Cronkite.) [I] debatedWilson on these various programs. I was interviewed by this other—it was ahot subject, because it was a conflict of interest. They wanted to be able togive cheap financing for their airplanes, but every time the Europeans wereselling their airplanes against ours, we were always winning anyway,regardless of the financing. And it’s true, it went on because we had betterproducts. But these debates got pretty animated—and I was pointing out thatthe American taxpayer is losing this much on every airplane, and Wilsonwould say, “We’re going to lose these jobs in Seattle!,” and all this. And so itgot to be kind of exciting.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] You liked that? Draper: Yes. Charlie Rose interviewed me. He’s a wonderful guy.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What are we talking about, early eighties, was this going on? Draper: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now, step back a minute. Why did Reagan appoint you? How did he knowabout you? Draper: Because of George [H.W.] Bush. See, I was asked by George Bush to be hisfinancial chairman for Northern California, when he was running againstReagan for president—then it became finance chairman for California, andthen it became co-finance chairman for the whole country, together with hisbrother, Jonathan Bush. Robert [A.] Mosbacher, [Jr.] was the financechairman, and the two of us were co-chairmen nationally. So I got very muchinto that. I raised a lot of money for George Bush.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But all this started because of your reputation in making good deals in venturecapital? Draper: Yes. There was a friend of mine and George Bush, a man named George Pfau,who suggested that I would do well at this because I had raised money forYale. I was chairman of the major gifts for Yale for the fourteen westernstates during a Yale campaign. So George suggested to Bush that I do this. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. It was clear you were good with money. Draper: Yes, right. So that ended up being a very good move for me, because itchanged my life. I loved George Bush, and he being a Yalie to boot.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, the network. Draper: We had a community of interest there.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, how did it change your life? Draper: I ended up going to Washington, and I ended up going to the UN. I wouldn’thave done any of those things. I would’ve stayed—unless I had some otheropportunity—which I did have once. When Nixon was elected, the man whowas the lieutenant governor of California, Bob [Robert H.] Finch, was askedto be the head of HEW [Health, Education, and Welfare], because he wantedto be, I think, chief of staff for Nixon, but didn’t get that job. He asked me,because I had been helpful to him, to come back to Washington. But then Iwas just a young squirt that didn’t have any money, and I said, “No, I betterstay with my venture capital here.” But this time I was ready to go, and that’s how I got there, working againstReagan. [chuckles] But I got to love the guy. I think he was a marvelouspresident, because he understood the job so well. He understood it’s a big—it’s the image, and not jumping in and being the first one to draw the line inthe sand, but being, “well, maybe we can think about that.” He was so gentle,and yet he had some core beliefs that were tough—very small government andbig defense and low taxes. I think that was the heart of his—and he didn’tvary much from that. I met with him a number of times in the White House, inthe cabinet room, with a group that included the independent agencies, ofwhich I represented one. Like the SEC is an independent agency. Anyway, itwas a great experience back there. That was all about the Export-Import Bank.But then the other fun part of it was getting to know other people inWashington and cooperating with them on certain things. The learning curvewas very steep for me.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I can imagine, yes. Draper: When I went back, Jim [James A.] Baker, [III] asked me to be the number twoin presidential personnel, until they got that better organized. This was rightafter Reagan was elected, and even though I wouldn’t go join the ExportImport Bank until, say, August of that year, he wanted me back to help organize and put some computers back into the personnel office. [laughs]Being out here, they thought I had some technology background, but also theyjust wanted somebody they trusted. Baker was back there because of Bush.And so Baker and Bush and I were good friends, and the other one was thesecretary of commerce, Mac Baldridge, who was also a Bush person. The restof them were pretty much Reagan people. I mean they were on his team all theway through. So I did that. I was in the White House for about six months and that wasreally something. It was like drinking out of a fire hose, because the daybegan at seven o’clock in the morning and you didn’t get back [home] untilmidnight. When I first went there, there were 25,000 résumés in the backroom, just locked in a closet, people had sent them in unsolicited. Someonejust packed them up and left them there. No organization to it. It was really aquite interesting experience. So I met with Baker and Meese and Deaver.Mike [Michael K.] Deaver was his PR guy, Reagan’s public relations person.Ed Meese became the attorney general later, but he was in the White House.So it was a triumvirate, those three, with Baker being the chief of staff. Theyeach had a title, but they acted in unison pretty much. We met every day atfive o’clock in the afternoon, on personnel matters, for six months. I learned alot in that time. I would say it was a real high in my life. There was a lot ofexcitement.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: When you say you learned a lot, are you thinking in a very broad way—yourhorizons were expanding? Or are you thinking about picking up specific kindsof information that you hadn’t encountered before? Draper: My horizons were expanding at a rapid rate, yes. Both things are true, you’repicking up—I didn’t have a course where I say, this will help me in being abetter venture capitalist, if that’s what you’re driving at. I just wanted to havea full life and do as much as I could in the way of helping other people; and byso doing, I helped myself. I have a great belief that the more you help otherpeople, the more you help yourself. I was just helping George Bush when hewas running for president, to become president, not because I thought that wasgoing to get me back to Washington or anything; I just thought, he’s a goodman. I’d like to help him, whatever he wants me to do, and that’s been a prettygood philosophy over my life, is to try and do as many things for other peopleas I can and see where it leads me. But I don’t have a goal to get to a certainpoint, a certain business position, a certain political position, a certain dollarnet worth or anything. I’m just having a good time. [laughter] And I was backthen! Phyllis loved going back to Washington, too because she got a job as the—Loret [Miller] Ruppe was another Bush appointee, and she ran the PeaceCorps. So my wife went to work for the Peace Corps for five years, and that was a great experience for her. I married her straight out of college, agetwenty-one, and she never worked. So she was very excited by a real career, areal job that was very challenging. She was Loret Ruppe’s direct assistant.That made it fun. And socially, it was good because the Export-Import Bankhad to keep up with lots of other countries that had embassies there inWashington, so we had a very active social life, from her point of view, and Ihad an active life professionally, in just keeping track of a variety ofinternational aspects of the job. I started to tell you about Walter Cronkite—during that sensitive period whereI was at odds with the Boeing people and really, GE, too, by the way. Jack[John Francis] Welch, [Jr.] didn’t like what I’d done too, but he wasn’t quiteas active on it. But this is a different experience. I was invited over to 60Minutes to be interviewed on 60 Minutes. Not over there; they came to myoffice. I had one of the biggest offices in Washington. It was as big as theOval Office, because it was built years ago, during the Depression, when theguy who came from Texas, built it; he wanted to look down on the young manin the White House. He was a big cheese because he was also in charge of, Iguess, one of the big programs that helped—the WPA or something like that.Who’s the guy at 60 Minutes that’s so interesting and active? Do you everwatch 60 Minutes?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I haven’t watched it for a while. Draper: I asked Walter Cronkite out here—he was a member of the same camp of theBohemian Grove that I’m in—and we’re both there stark naked in the shower,and I ask, “Well, what would it be like to be interviewed by 60 Minutes?” Atthat time, they had this reputation for cutting and pasting—and he said, “I’lltell you what you should do.” He was a part of CBS at the time. He said, “Youought to tell him that you’re going to tape the program.” So that if they cut ortook things out of context, you would have a case that they had reallymisrepresented you. The reason they wanted to talk to me was my predecessor had made a badloan to the Congo, to Zaire. Mobutu was the president of Zaire. The idea wasto build a big power plant, a power line across the Congo, across Zaire. So thefirst thing I was asked was—and I was brand new on the job—“What do youthink of these World Bank reports?” And I said, “Oh, I think very highly ofthem.” [He] said, “Would it surprise you to know that the World Bank reporton this issue of this loan to Zaire said it’s a disaster and it was a miserabledecision, and that the Export-Import Bank never should’ve made this loan?”[laughs] Well, I was kind of caught, you know. All of a sudden thecameraman said something had gone wrong with the camera. So I was askedto do it again. So he said, “What do you think of the World Bank reports?” 60And I said, “Oh, I don’t know. Some are good and some are bad.” [laughter]And he cracked up, just the way you are! And there was another fun thing about that interview. He had been sittingtalking to me, and he was sitting on my desk, and I could see that his coat hadbeen bought in Toronto. It just happened to stick in my mind. So he said, atthe end of all this, “Well, I guess you do pretty good things for the ExportImport Bank. The Export-Import Bank does good things for the country inexports, but the big problem in this country is the imports keep increasing. It’snot so much that the exports aren’t growing, but they’re not growing as fast asall the imports.” I said, “You know, that’s really true. For example, itwould’ve been great if you had bought that suit in this country.” [laughter] Hesaid, “What do you mean? What do you mean?” He never did admit it. I’m sosorry I can’t come up with his name. That was a fun interview, as it turnedout. I walked around the block thinking, God, they’re going to really makemincemeat of me, probably, on Sunday night when this comes out.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And did they? Draper: No. As it turned out, they made a little report that— Oh, by the way, he toldme, “Would it surprise you to know that Mobutu has three houses in Belgium,chateaus?” And I said no. He said, “All that cash that you loaned himprobably ended up there.” I said, “Well, one thing I do know, and that is thatwe never give cash to any country. We just pay the exporter, and the exporterships the product. You can’t put a Caterpillar tractor in a Swiss bank account.”[laughter] And I thought, ooh, I’ve won. Then the more I thought about it,walking around the block waiting, that Sunday night, for the program, Ithought, oh, I was a little too smart, and so I worried. But it turned out they didn’t show any of it. They just reported somethingabout the Export-Import Bank had made a bad loan in Zaire. See, if I hadn’tgone to be interviewed, they would’ve had an empty chair there and said, theExport-Import Bank chairman would not meet with us, and here is this report.So I had to do it. But I didn’t know much about the bank, or much aboutpolitics, or much about interviewing. But I felt that was an interview thatcame off pretty darn well.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All right. You were finding opportunities. And I imagine one of theopportunities that cropped up was the UN Development Program. How didthat evolve?  Draper: Well, I decided I wanted to go back to California, after five years running theExport-Import Bank, and having a lot of fun, liking the job, but feeling mylearning curve had flattened out, that my contribution, which was to pushmore private sector thinking into the bank, but also trying to reduce thesubsidy, which I did significantly—I think I saved $10 billion for theAmerican taxpayer. That’s peanuts today, but in those days it was not aninsignificant number.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Just making sure that they were— Draper: Well, just that subsidy on the interest rates that I did. Oh, I didn’t tell you thefinal on that. I jumped the interest rate, but about three weeks later, theEuropeans came in and followed me. Well, after that was over, then of course,Boeing felt better and everybody felt better. I knew they would. I just knewsomebody had to show leadership and do it, and then the others would follow.But there are a lot of bureaucrats who don’t want to make a move and thinkyou’re tricking them and so on.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: When you made a move like that, taking a leadership position, did you spendany sleepless nights? Draper: None. [laughs] Because I knew I was right. I was representing the Reaganadministration that didn’t like subsidies, that wanted to reduce— Reaganwould have us meet every so often and show how we’ve reduced our budgetby 10 percent for the year.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Really? Draper: Oh, yes. He was definitely strict on wanting the size of government to comedown, and so we all worked hard on trying to do that. He knocked out lotsof—the regulations used to be like this [gestures] under the Democrats, and[only] about a third were in when he left. So I had all that to carry over to thisindependent agency, because I did want to do things that would berepresentative of what I considered to be good management: reducing the coststructures and yet getting the job done of promoting American exports.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, it sounds as though Reagan policy and your personal views were prettymuch in line. Draper: Yes. They were. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were there ever cases where they weren’t? Draper: No. Well, I went into the White House to argue for a certain expansion of onepart of the bank, so I needed extra budget. I negotiated with Dean [meansDavid A.] Stockman, the budget director in the White House, because Icouldn’t get it just talking to Ed Meese, who would meet with us to kind offigure out what— So he said, “Well, do you want to meet with the presidenton it?” “Yes, I do.” And so Stockman and I, at loggerheads, argued. One,Stockman trying to hold stiff to keep the budget down and don’t give anyexpansion here. Despite my understanding his position, I felt this was a reallygood argument to stretch our mission and so on. So I had a debate with him in front of Reagan and George Bush. [laughs] Andthat was quite an experience for me, because Stockman had an agile mind andwas a very good debater. In the final analysis, then, Reagan kind of closed themeeting saying, “Well, I think it would be better to sell the Chineseautomobiles instead of bicycles.” [laughs] That was the way he summarized!He was sympathizing with our trying to push bigger products, and biggerloans to make those products in essence. But he didn’t make any decision onthe issue, he just left the room. Ultimately, I think there was a slight compromise, but I didn’t get everything Iwanted. It was a great experience. Everybody that gets any opportunity to goto work for a local government or a state government, or to go to Washington,or an international operation—which we can talk about—should do it becauseit’s just such an eye opener to—so many issues that you never think of whenyou’re just focused on your business, your social life, and your town.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Okay. The UN Development Program. Draper: Yes, so I got called by the White House, saying that there was going to be achange in the American that was running the United Nations DevelopmentProgram. Well, I didn’t know what that was, [laughs] like most Americans.But they pointed out, and I learned pretty quickly, that it was a massiveprogram. It’s a very interesting, big operation. And so I expressed interest init, called about five people for advice. One was George Bush, Senior, andGeorge [P.] Shultz, another was Tom [Alden Winship] Clausen, who was thenpresident of the World Bank, and a couple others. They all thought that it wasa really interesting job, and they were absolutely right. I don’t think any ofthem knew how interesting it was. So I decided to take that job, and I went up to New York, had never been inthe UN building. I met a wonderful man there, my first visit, who had beenpresident of the Jamaican airlines. He was Jamaican, and he was my deputy. He later became head of the Jamaican central bank. [G.] Arthur Brown washis name, probably one of the most intelligent people I’ve ever worked with,or perhaps the most [intelligent] and with good judgment, as well. You canhave a lot of bright people, but you’ve got to have that judgment. So he helpedme get my feet on the ground and understand the job. Javier [Pérez de] Cuellar was the secretary general at the time. He’s fromColombia [means Peru], later ran for president—didn’t win—of Colombia[means Peru]. But he was the secretary general. My job, as it turned out— Ididn’t realize this when I went, but it turns out I was the second rankingperson in the UN, because it was a coordinating—I had this 8,000-personoperation to run. But I also had responsibility for coordinating the other aidorganizations of the UN. So UNICEF and the UN Environment Program,the—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All the other agencies. Draper: Yes, but of course, I was an undersecretary general, but there were probablyfifteen others who were undersecretary generals. But I got $50 more per yearthan the others, because of this added responsibility [chuckles]. There was nodeputy secretary general at that time. Now there is. But at that time, I, in away, was that. So that was a big-time job, and a fascinating job, had 8,000people, as I say, and they were spread, about 80 percent of them, outside ofthe country, in developing countries, because our mission was to helpdeveloping countries with aid programs—not the power plants, buildingschools or bridges; it was more the soft training programs—irrigation plans,economic advice. I got Paul Volcker to go to China for only $10,000. He had just been head ofour Fed, and he agreed to go over and talk to the Chinese government about—[laughs] I think they’re benefiting today from his advice—about strengtheningtheir economic moves. We helped every developing country—communist, socialist, capitalist. Wenever could argue about their politics. The amount of money that we spent ineach country depended on the poverty level of the country and the population,as a formula. China and India would’ve taken most of the money, so theywere truncated; but all the other countries were under that formula. They wereless than that. Even though China and India were the two biggest programs wehad, they didn’t scoop up all the money. But we didn’t give cash to any of the countries—like the Export-Import Bank.We bought projects and programs by hiring specialists to do various projectsthat were agreed to between our resident representative. We tried to have aresident representative in every country, and then he would have a staff that would then come up with some programs that would be good for thegovernment. The government would say, well, we don’t like this onebecause—like my good friend Fidel Castro would not like to have ademocracy program in Cuba. But on the other hand, he might suggest havingsome education project that his brother-in-law was running, and we wouldn’tlike that. So there’s a negotiation going on at the local level. Then the residentrepresentative proposes some projects up to the central management in NewYork. We had 20 percent of our people in New York; 80 percent were indeveloping countries, unlike the World Bank. The World Bank has it just theother way. Eighty percent of their people are in Washington, D.C. So we felt itwas a well-dispersed organization, but quite a management challenge.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I can imagine! Draper: Yes, because we had over a hundred different nationalities working in ourorganization.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right, and then you were supposed to be organizing, administering theagencies within the UN. It seems an impossibly large job. Draper: Not organizing—but overseeing. That was more of a coordination andco[operation job]. Yes, it was a big job. [laughs] It was a good job.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But you found it doable? Draper: Yes. It worked. The UNDP had a great reputation for honesty andstraightforward management, good management. It was not the diplomaticside of the UN, which of course is the most important part of the UN, Isuppose I’d have to say that. So nothing to do with the General Assembly orthe Security Council. Except [laughs] when politics came in—which it didonce in a while—to our projects. But mostly, we were a workaday kind of a—trying to get good solid aid programs from an international source, which wasvery important. Lots of countries didn’t want to do business with USAID. Bythe way, then the Russians and the Americans were at loggerheads, but it wassoftening. As I got there longer and longer, I went there in 1986 and you knowthe [Berlin] wall came down in 1990, I think, or 1989. So it was a veryexciting time, because there was a lot to do with Russia. I was the highestranking American, of course, in the UN. So therefore, when I went, I wouldbe welcomed on two levels: one, as an American who had the ear of PresidentBush, and also as the head of this large UN organization. So it was a very exhilarating job. There were lots of stories I could tell you about it, but I don’twant to bore you.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was there any kind of reporting arrangement that you had with the secretarygeneral? Draper: Yes, I reported to the secretary general. He was a very mild mannered man.Then he was replaced, while I was there, by Boutros Boutros-Ghali, who was[laughs] exactly the opposite. He had been, for twenty-five years, the ministerof state for Egypt, and so he was a sophisticated, but a tough, rather arrogant,rather megalomaniac personality.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was he interfering with what you were doing? Draper: No. Once in a while he had a different opinion or he’d have an opinion onsomething that my people on the ground felt that wasn’t going to work. Yes, Ihad a few altercations with him, but not much. I got along pretty much withboth of them, in different ways. But they were totally different personalities.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why did you leave the UNDP? Draper: Well, I was there for seven years, and I got reelected. You see, you’reproposed by your government, like the US government proposed me. But Iwas nominated by the Secretary General and elected by the GeneralAssembly. It sounds complicated, but the truth is at that time, it was always anAmerican that had that job, because it involved a good bit of money raising. Iwent around with a tin cup to the capitals of the rich countries and raisemoney. It didn’t come out of the UN budget. It was zero budgeting. You startfrom ground zero on the first day of the year, and you’ve got to raise themoney that you spend. So I raised about a billion and a half dollars, and thatwas a lot of money in those days.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And was it for specific programs? Draper: Yes, well, we designed those programs. But each year—it was a rolling thing.So we already had commitments out there. We had funds to keep thosehealthy, but every year we had to raise new funding to be sure that we couldgo out the sixth year. Usually it’s a five year—well, a lot of them vary, butfive-year programs were not unusual. Yes, so that was a fun part too, becauseI’d go to meet with some of the really neat people in Norway, meet with thepresident of Sweden. He had a meeting with me, and he said, “You know, thismorning I was walking around the park, and I was trying to think of your title,” which was administrator, at that time—minister and CEO, butadministrator was the same thing they use for the USAID today.Administrator rather than president, because you’re administrating an aidprogram. So he said, “I was trying to think, and the only thing I could think ofwas executioner.” [laughter] He was a great—but they welcomed you. As Isaid, I went sort of in two ways. So when I got to these capitals, I was reallyvery warmly welcomed. The UN was in a much stronger position, from a public relations standpoint,in those days. The goodwill for the UN was much greater, because thingswere going on between Russia and ourselves that were warming and the UNwas being used for some of those connections and information trading and allthat. And [Thomas R.] Pickering was a great ambassador to the UN. He wasthe US ambassador to the UN at that time. He was a great guy. So everythingwas great. I just felt good about the UN, I felt great about the job, I had a goodrelationship with—I could go into the Oval Office and talk with George Bush,which I did a number of times. Draper: I raised more money than anybody had ever raised for the program. We hadvery interesting programs. I had a private sector point of view, which I tried toimpress on the whole organization, to try and encourage our money to be usedto leverage a private activity or private enterprise or include the privateenterprise sector, the entrepreneurial efforts and so on. I took a friend of mine,Pitch Johnson, over to Romania and Poland and Hungary or something—afew countries, Bulgaria, maybe—to be the expert to help train classes onentrepreneurship. A lot of these CIS, they were called, Commonwealth of—[Independent States]—a spin off from Russia, these countries that were allpart of the Soviet Union, then they were splitting off. So I opened about eightor twelve offices that ringed around Russia, so I went to places likeAzerbaijan, Uzbekistan and Kyrgyzstan and—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Tajikistan and— Draper: I didn’t go there, but I did go to a lot of them. We opened an office in each ofthose, and many that I didn’t go to. It was all happening at that time becausethe Soviet Union was breaking up, and we had to have people to help. Well,they didn’t know anything about private sector. So you wanted somebody totrain them on what entrepreneurship, private sector is all about. They had noidea, in many cases. And of course, we worked directly with Russia in someof those things, even though they weren’t considered a developing country. Soit was a very good time to be there and a very exciting job.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Sounds that way. I only have about ten minutes more. Should we start onDraper International? That’s the next step.  Draper: We can, sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So I guess the question is, why did you leave the UN? And why back toventure capital? Draper: Okay. Seven years into it, reelected, after five years. So you have that feelingthat they want you, [laughs] which is nice. It didn’t happen to my successor.Or my predecessor. Anyway, I felt good about everything there, but I felt weshould come back home. Phyllis was there with me in New York all this time,and she was having a whirlwind experience, because we were very activesocially, too, when I was there and even when I wasn’t there. Sometimesshe’d come with me on some of these trips to Africa. She was a great help, inlots of ways. I paid her way; it didn’t go on the UN budget. I flew, by the way,business class. That was the tradition. Everybody but the secretary generalflies business class, which is a good sign that—. It was time for us to come back to California. She knew in Washington thatshe had gotten this damn disease, and so she needed time. It was time to comeback. So that’s what we did. She has Parkinson’s. For me, it was time to comeback, too because my learning curve was flattening out, my impact on theorganization was probably getting to be less and less important. We started awhole private sector division that emphasized activity, trying to encourageprivate sector activity in the various developing countries. It was good toleave. I could’ve stayed through the next term; probably could’ve stayed for along time, because they tend to reelect the devil they know, rather than thedevil they don’t. So I came back here and watched the grass grow for about a week. [<|endoftext|>
Interviewerlaughs] But I knew what I wanted to do, that I wanted to start a venture capitalfund company focused on an international country. Because of all myinternational activity, it was a natural for me to get going in the—and most ofthem did not have any venture capital.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, did you ever consider doing something other than venture capital? Draper: No. It was the only business I knew [chuckles]. I was comfortable with it, andso I never thought of doing anything else. I always loved venture capital. Thatwas not a problem. I never considered moving out of it. But I thought, gee,these countries I’d go to visit, they didn’t know anything about it. They didn’tknow what the term meant. It hadn’t hit. This is 1994, and so I told a friend ofmine what I wanted to do, Bill [William E.] McGlashan. And he said, “Well,why don’t you come over tonight?” (I mentioned that I wanted to look atPeruvian investments with a friend of mine who is Peruvian, not necessarily venture capital, but some kinds of investing down there in Peru.) [Bill said,] “Imet this woman [Robin Richards] who’s a second-year student at StanfordBusiness School, in Czech Republic, and I’d like you to come tonight becauseshe’s going to wrap up. This will be the second and last, or third and lastreport to me.” She had said, when I knew her in the summer in CzechRepublic, that she would like to study this and get a group of other studentsthat would help her, and could do a report and get credit for it in her secondyear. So I went to Stanford with him, and the five students gave a report. Shedidn’t really say very much, but I met Robin Richards. I didn’t think muchmore about it, except it was an interesting evening.Then I had put in a fax machine. If you work for one of these largeorganizations, big bureaucracies, you don’t do anything practical. [laughs] Sogoing off to an OfficeMax, or wherever I went, and buying a fax machine, andeven just plugging it in, it was kind of a big deal for me. [<|endoftext|>
Interviewer laughs] I gotit plugged in, and almost as soon as it was plugged in, her fax comes into me.I must’ve given her the number or something. It said, “I’d like to talk to youabout venture capital.” So we met at Il Fornaio that next Saturday morning,and I told her what I wanted to do, this international venture capital. She wasPhi Beta Kappa from the University of North Carolina, and from Atlanta. Soshe said, “I work for the vice president of Coca Cola. [I’d like] to do someventure capital for him. I was overseas. So this is exactly what I’d like to do.”So I said, “I think this thing’s going to work. [laughs] I just think you mightbe right for me, and I might be right for you.” In other words, I knew venturecapital out here, I knew the connections to the [Silicon] valley. She had thisyouth and energy, and connections of a younger [person]—most of theentrepreneurs that you back were closer to her age than mine, right? So at the end of three hours at Il Fornaio, that breakfast, we were partners. Sheknew what percentage of the company she was going to have. We didn’t knowwhat country we were going to, but I knew I wanted to go to Asia, and sheagreed. Maybe you need to go now, so why don’t we call it off and start up there.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, well, we got it started anyway, didn’t we?[End of Interview] <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You probably need to be reminded of where we stopped last time. We hadbarely begun to talk about Draper Richards. We didn’t yet talk about DraperInternational, which actually came a little earlier, did it not? Draper: Yes, Draper International came first.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, do you want to start with Draper International then? Draper: Sure, sure, sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You came back from the UN Development Program. Draper: Seven years of a wonderful part of my life. It is one of the great organizations.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. So you came back to California. And then what? Draper: So then I met Robin, and over breakfast we agreed to start a new venture firm.She was still a second-year student at Stanford Business School; southern gal,from Atlanta, a Phi Beta Kappa from the University of North Carolina. Shewas perfect because she had the youth and energy and connections. While ourplan was to go to Asia, we didn’t know which country we’d go to. But shewas perfect because she had connections with some of the young people outof Stanford and was able to identify with others of the same age, and youngpeople are what it’s typically about. Our program was to be an across-borderfund, so that we might start a company in the United States—the headquarterswould be in the United States, but all the money would be going into researchand so on in India, and then maybe the marketing effort was back in theUnited States, that kind of thing.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was it just India? Draper: I knew I wanted to go to Asia, and she agreed with that. She had livedoverseas a bit, had had a little bit of venture capital before going to Stanford,with the vice president of Coca-Cola, who had a personal fund in venturecapital. 70 So I thought, well, we’d better sort it out, and we looked into China, Vietnam,India, Indonesia, even Hong Kong. We decided on India because we wanted abig, complicated country. They spoke English. That was big time, because ifyou’re making an investment in a private company as a minority investor, youwant to be darn sure you understand what they’re saying. So English wasreally important, but English also helped them get a jump on the softwarebusiness. So they were leaders, over China and other countries, in computersoftware, because the language was helpful in that respect. They had ademocracy, rule of law, and that, to me, was very important, having seen somecountries, many countries, who were dictatorships, where the law didn’t meananything. I knew that in China, you might have a five-year contract with somebody, andat the end of three years, they say, “Well, it doesn’t work for me anymore,”and they just walk away. And that’s the way it works. Now, I didn’t want tohave that kind of a experience. But China was the one that was the mostlikely, other than India. Although Indonesia seemed like a good place at thetime, it had some of those same problems of a lack of democracy, and it justdidn’t seem to have the technology expertise in the country. You see, India had five at that time, I think now they’ve got seven, institutesof technology—Indian Institute of Technology, they call them. They’vetypically been sponsored by different countries—like Germany sponsoredone, and I think the United States sponsored one, Britain sponsored one.Hundreds of thousands of men and women apply, and they select about 1,200a year for each of the seven, so it’s much more selective than Yale, Harvard,Princeton, Stanford, in that they’ve got such a wave of people, all of whomknow how great this education is. So they had a good education system forundergraduate. We have a much better graduate program, so they come overhere pretty well trained, technically. So this was a big bonanza for us, to havea country that had a democracy, rule of law, spoke our language, and had thetechnology training in some very sophisticated stuff. Now, the question was a mushy, awkward, sluggish democracy, right? It’s thelargest democracy in the world. Well, it’s the largest democracy in the world,but it’s one of the youngest—it’s 1947 when they became a democracy, and ithad been a socialist country for so many years. Now, I happened to know,through my UN connections, a man named Manmohan Singh. ManmohanSingh had been finance minister for two years, before we went there, and sothe first call we made was to Manmohan Singh, who was then financeminister. Prior to that, several years before, he had been head of the CentralBank [of India]. But he was making some changes and the country was reallybeginning to catch hold. In fact, I had met him in Leeds Castle, in Kent,England, which was Anne Boleyn’s palace. We had a dinner there. We bothbelonged to something called the Tidewater Group. It was a group ofinternationalists who got together every year in a different country, andEngland was our host that year. It was a very erudite group. It was the head of UNDP, the head of UNICEF, but also the finance minister of Turkey orKuwait or China could be [invited]. Singh had been the head of the CentralBank of India, so he was a member for that reason, but he was between jobs. Everybody in the morning, following the dinner, had talked about making jobsin these developing countries, but I hadn’t said anything and he hadn’t saidanything. In the afternoon, I spoke up and said, “Everybody’s talking aboutjobs and nobody’s mentioned the private sector. All they talk about is how thegovernment can do this and the government can do that. My idea is push theprivate sector and everything else will come together.” He came up after thatand said, “We in India believe in the mixed economy. The private sector’s allright, but also government.” What it meant was socialism, and he was asocialist. Still is a socialist. But he also is a very bright man, who saw whatwas happening in the rest of the world, where capitalism was really takingroot. So in his two years as finance minister, after this meeting, he made a lotof changes. He opened up the economy. Starting with Gandhi, it was, let’s keep India for the Indians and keepeverybody else out. Let’s grow our own wool, cotton for own clothes, and doit all ourselves—so keep everybody else out. That really, for forty years—thefamily of [Jawaharlal] Nehru, who came later, and then Indira Gandhi, who’sno relation to Mahatma Gandhi—but for forty years, that family kept India asocialist country, and we in the United States backed Pakistan. So India, in aknee jerk way, went to the Soviet Union. So anyway, things were changing in India. I knew that it was changing a littlebit, although it was early days, two years into it, with Manmohan Singh at thefinance helm. I took Robin in to meet this delightful, warm, very brilliant, butvery soft-appearing man, in his blue turban. I shook hands with him andcongratulated him on being finance minister and doing so well, “Well, as amatter of fact, congratulations on taking all of the advice that I gave you inLeeds Castle.” He laughed, because I had told him, “Mixed economy’s fine,having some government and some private sector, but get the government tobe a few percent and the rest of it the private sector.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And was that what he was moving towards? Draper: He was moving toward open doors, no tariffs, open economy, andencouraging the private sector and tamping down the power and the controlsystem and all the certificates. Every businessman in Bangalore had to go toDelhi to get a permit to go into business, if he wanted to start a new business.And then everybody has their hand out, so there’s a lot of corruption, and stillis, around Delhi. But anyway, that was our only touch with the government.Our ambassador gave us a nice party and we announced, “We’re startingDraper International in Bombay and Bangalore.”  We hired two young people, Indians, to be the feet on the street and tee upsome deals for Robin and me to see them, and then Robin and I went aboutfour times a year to India. We would spend a couple of weeks there and we’dgo through all the deals that they had been able to uncover. And we being thefirst, the very first foreign venture capital company to come into India—atleast the first American one—there might have been a British one, but theynever knew what it really meant, it was a commonwealth fund, I think. So ourname was pretty well known very fast, because here was some excitingstuff—venture capital, which was hardly known what it meant. But it wascoming to India, and we had a very good reception there.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was the finance minister a key to all of this? Draper: He was. Today Manmohan Singh is prime minister of India and doing verywell without my advice.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I’ve been very aware of how you use a social network over the years. Youhave connections here, connections there. I’m imagining that that was lesstrue in India. Draper: Oh, it didn’t help us in our deal making. We made twenty-five investments inIndia, or as I say, cross border, and we did not need government help. In fact,we avoided Delhi. That was the last time we went, I think, although we visitedIndia over 20 times. We definitely wanted to just focus on the business. Butwhat he was doing was opening up the economy, so that an entrepreneur couldstart a business without going to pay some bureaucrat to go into business.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you didn’t have to handle that part of it, because I’m just thinking thatthere must’ve been some barriers in a foreign country to trying to operate asyou normally operate. Draper: To what?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You wouldn’t have had the infrastructure in India, that you were used tohaving in this country— Draper: No, that’s true.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: —where you’d been operating for decades. And was that a barrier in any way?  Draper: Well, no. The biggest barrier was they still had this very bureaucratic way ofwriting agreements, and lawyers there drew up documents in a confusing way.So when we finally closed the deal, the Indian form is for everybody to haveto initial every page, and then you couldn’t copy that page; you had to haveoriginals! So I must’ve signed my initials 2,000 times, before we could evengo into business. But he was changing that part of it, so Manmohan Singh wasimportant to us because he was opening up the Indian economy. So ourinvestments did a lot better because of him—but no government involvement.None of our companies had anything to do with the government.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. And all these were Indian companies? Draper: Well, no, some of them were American corporations, but we would hire theteam, have offices in Bangalore, and do the technology, sort of offshoretechnology, and then bring the product back maybe to sell around the world.But no—we had a really wonderful experience. The Indians are very creative.Of course, there are so many of them, that if you’re dealing with the brightestand the best—many of these were IIT graduates—you are getting very brightpeople, and they were just looking for a better life. Venture capital was new tothem. It was a big help. They couldn’t believe it. They usually thought thefamily had to have the business. They had to keep it small because of thesocialist problem—you can’t get too big without going through a lot ofpayoffs and all that. Singh did away with a lot of that. Now, our team over there was very good at rounding up and sorting out, andone of them had worked at ICICI, which is a quasi bank. His name was KiranNadkarni. Abhay Havalder came from Hewlett-Packard HCL, HP-HCL.ICICI is like a bank, and Kiran knew where a lot of bodies were buried. So weavoided dishonest people, thanks to him. In one of our investments, I think wegot ripped off. I had put together, in order to get this started, an investmentadvisory team for the partnership of Indians in India, one of them being RatanTata, who’s one of the famous industrialists in the country. He has that smallcar, that Indian car. He is a brilliant man, and again, one of the first people Itook Robin to see, because I knew him through the UN or the Export-ImportBank—or both, actually. I knew him in my international travels earlier. Ratanagreed to become an advisor to us, which didn’t hurt in getting our nameout—so that kind of thing. We got other people, not quite in his category, but other people that werehelpful to [us], one of whom said to me, “Don’t do that deal.” We lost about amillion dollars on an investment. It was in the movie production field. Hesaid, “Don’t do it,” and we should’ve taken his advice, but we didn’t, becausesomebody else that seemed to be very knowledgeable was going in with us.We both lost our money.  But all the rest seemed to do pretty darn well. They didn’t all make money,but some— All of them were technology deals except for one, which wasgoing to be like The Gap. We were going to brand our line. We would havepants and shirts made and sell them under brand names, a couple of differentbrands. That was a great idea, because up to that point, everybody in Indiawent to a tailor to have their pants made. They don’t wear jackets, particularlyin southern India, but basically, they don’t. They wear a tie, they wear a shirt,and they wear a pair of pants. So we went along with this. The company had very good management andwas going to make a lot of money, because people were beginning to shift tobuying their clothes off the rack. It was just turning; this is 1994. Instead ofgoing to a tailor to make it, they could find something that’s already made.They were all very smart, and everybody knows what was going on, so inIndia, the word traveled fast—and they had been in textiles, of course, all thehistory of India. The Silk Road runs through parts of China, but still, India isvery big in that kind of thing. So everybody else copied us very quickly. Wejust barely got our money out of that deal. But on balance, we did well. Wegot sixteen times the limited partners’ money back, in six years, which is verygood by any measure. It’s a very good return for venture capital, or any otherbusiness.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, when you started off with kind of a blank slate, how did you find thesetwenty-five companies? Draper: Well, that’s where these two Indian partners came in—that was their mission,to go find opportunities. When the word is out that there’s money here, bagsof money from these dumb foreigners, there’s a line-up [laughter]. So they gota good selection, and we were very lucky.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, it seems to me that you really needed these two guys. Draper: Oh, yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And had they ever had experience in venture capital before? Draper: The one that worked for the quasi bank ICICI, had, in effect, some privatebanking experience, but I wouldn’t call it venture capital like we did. Theterm wasn’t known, any more than it was when I first started in SiliconValley.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, how did they learn the ropes then?  Draper: Well, we coached them. And Kiran Nadkarni had enough financialexperience. He was a financial guy, so it didn’t take a lot of understanding tosaying, hey, we want good quality people. He knew about quality becausehe’d been a banker, basically. He had a warmth about him, people trusted him,and so that was good; he was able to sort it out. The other one, AbhayHavaldar, was more of a marketing guy, and a hands-on executive. Whenwe’d get into a company, he liked to get into the operations of it and help withtheir marketing and that kind of thing. He’s now a partner of a much biggerfund that came in later, called General Atlantic. They became a limited partnerof ours—the only institution we had. The other partners in our fund, which was not a big fund, but we had someindividuals—maybe eight Indians here in Silicon Valley that put some moneyinto the fund, say a quarter of a million or that kind of investment, and thensome friends of mine and my former partners at Sutter Hill. We had a nicegroup of maybe twenty or thirty partners—only one institution, GeneralAtlantic. General Atlantic wanted to get their feet wet. It’s a big fund, and thiswas a little investment, like an asterisk on their balance sheet, but they wantedto get their feet wet in India. Ultimately, when we decided not to go for a second fund—for personalreasons; Robin was raising babies, and I didn’t want to go to India four timesa year. So once we had gotten the partners sixteen times their money back, wedecided to declare victory and go home. [<|endoftext|>
Interviewer laughs] It was a chapter inmy life that was very exciting. I’ve invested myself in a couple of Indiancross-border funds, and I’m friends with lots of good Indians, whom I’vegotten to know through that experience. So it was a wonderful educationalexperience. Robin and I—we would work for five days, and then we’d taketwo days and go to some remote part of the country that we hadn’t been tobefore. We’ve actually been to many parts of India that many Indians have notgotten to, so we have a lot of experiences. As you can see around the office,we have pictures that she took. She has a very good Leica camera that shetook those pictures with, so we have a lot of wonderful memories about India.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So Draper International, just to clarify, was really this one fund. Draper: It was one fund, and it was focused only on India. We thought, well, we’re notgoing to try and take on the world; let’s do it right in one country—and wedid.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now, were you the first, or one of the first, to do venture capital long distancelike this?  Draper: We were the first one to go into India, I know. I imagine there were others thatdid something long distance, but not too many, and for good reason. ArthurRock, for example, says, “I don’t want to invest in anything I can’t drive toand get home at night.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: No, I’ve heard that too. So this seems a very different way of doing it. Draper: So this was a different thing. Yes, no question of that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now, does helping to building a company, as well as make money, drop out ofthe picture when you invest at such a distance? Because you can’t be there allthe time. Draper: I agree. But the partners that were there did the hands on. They acted on theboards when the headquarters was there. If the headquarters was here, wewould go on the board. So there were several that we did here that werehelping directly.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Some of the twenty-five companies were here? Draper: Yes. The headquarters was here, but we spent the money there. And we gotsome leverage with OPIC, Overseas Private Investment Company. If you askanybody at OPIC, they’ll tell you it’s the best fund they ever backed. But thatis a fund much like the SBIC program in Washington, where they want toencourage Americans to invest in developing countries, and so they will makea loan of two dollars for every dollar you invest. They’ll lend you two dollarsfor every dollar you invest in a developing country. We paid them back early.We had to pay them a pre-payment penalty in fact. They today say becausethey got 4 percent of the profits, they say ours was the best fund they ever had,and I’m sure that’s true.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And why were you paying a penalty? Draper: Well, because if somebody lends you money, they want a certain term.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You were cutting it short. Draper: We were cutting it short, and that was just written into the agreement. Wewere happy to pay them off because we were making money faster than wehad a right to, really. [laughs] We were lucky, let’s face it. We hit a great country for this kind of thing. Now there are scores of venture firms going toIndia. It’s really amazing.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you think you opened the floodgates? Draper: We did, yes, we did.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you ever have any bad moments, thinking: I’m not there right on thescene; do I really know what’s going on in these companies? Draper: Sure. But I was never afraid that my two partners wouldn’t tell me everythingthat they saw. We could always send Kiran in Bangalore to, let’s say, Madras,and get him to find out what was going on, if there was a problem. But everydeal didn’t go well. We lost money on probably half a dozen. We still haveone investment over there, and it’s a company we started in India. Theheadquarters is there. We have rupee stock. They went public on theNASDAQ exchange, and we can’t sell our stock until they go public on theBombay exchange, for certain Indian rules. I think if we’d known that, whenthey decided to go public on the NASDAQ, we would’ve said, find a way toget us out. But the company’s doing well. It’s the sort of Yahoo of India. It’s aportal, so-called, and doing really very well.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was there any pattern in terms of technologies for these twenty-fivecompanies? Was there a sector that you— Draper: It was almost all IT, information technology. So that’s India.Then as far as Draper Richards goes, Robin and I had opportunities to investin non-Indian situations, but our rules were that we didn’t want to take ourfocus off India, because we had other people’s money. Some call it OPM,[chuckles] Other People’s Money. We didn’t want to take our attention awayfrom that because we felt a fiduciary responsibility. So what we did was toform a small company that just had our own money. We didn’t put a lot ofmoney into it. We then started to make investments. Then we put a little moremoney in, and made more investments that were not in India. We would notgo on the board of any of them. In other words, we were more inactiveinvestors and had the approval of the other limited partners in the India fund.Just like you may have a job at Bancroft Library, but Bancroft wouldn’t see itas a conflict of interest if you did something for another library.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And why did you do this?  Draper: To make money! And that’s the long and the short of it—make money.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] And why not go on the board as well? Draper: Well, because we had these others who had put money behind us to focus onIndia, and we can just spread ourselves so thin. So we didn’t want to take a lotof time in board meetings with a local company.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. Now, all of this is happening under the rubric or the umbrella of DraperRichards? Draper: Well, there’re actually two operations. One is Draper Richards and one isDraper International. In Draper Richards, we’ve now added a partner, HowardHartenbaum, and so that’s a little different. But basically, the ownership isroughly the same.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So Draper International didn’t die with that first fund. Draper: No, it hasn’t, because we still have this one last remaining investment, acompany called Rediff. Any Indian knows about Rediff, because they cancheck the cricket scores and what’s playing in Bollywood. It’s a portal; it’sjust like Yahoo. You get a lot of action on it. It’s a search firm, it’s a searchbusiness. They have a search engine, like Google does. It’s not quite as goodas Google, but maybe one day.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And is it India focused? Or is it international? Draper: It’s only in India.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Okay, should we talk about Skype? Draper: Skype was a great company.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: We haven’t really followed an investment through a company. Would Skypebe a good one? Draper: Skype would be a good one, sure. The way Skype happened was I hiredHoward Hartenbaum. It was pretty crowded here for venture capital. There was a lot of money, and at the time I set up with him, there were not as manyopportunities as there was money chasing those opportunities.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You mean strictly the Bay Area? Draper: Here in Silicon Valley. So I asked Howard, whom I met because he hadhelped his brother run a company. I asked him to go over to Europe and lookaround Europe, because he loved to travel and his kids were young. Hemarried a Japanese gal. He lived in Japan for four years, worked for <|endoftext|>
Interviewer,and for one of the automobile companies at one time—MIT background, verybright, very energetic, a workaholic. And so he set up in Luxembourg, and he invested in four or five smallinvestments for me personally, and then Tim Draper said, “Why don’t you gotalk to the guys at Kazaa?” And Kazaa was a peer to peer connective systemthat delivered music, so that you could download music from somebody else.Of course, the music industry hated it, sued Kazaa; Kazaa went out ofbusiness. But the two founders of Kazaa, who had set up with sometechnology talent, went back to Sweden. Howard, instead of saying to Tim, “Kazaa’s gone, kaput,” and forgettingabout it, Howard had the brains and the energy to go up to Stockholm andlook up the two founders of Skype. One was a Swede, thirty-nine years old,and one was a Dane, twenty-nine years old. The Dane was very creative, andthe Swede was organized and strong in business management. Howard foundthese guys writing their business plan for Skype. So he said, “Well, let mehelp you write the business plan. I’ve run a company, my brother’s company.I’ll help you write the business plan.” And he did. “I’ll put some of Draper’smoney into this to start it up.” So I was in on the first round. I was the firstinvestor in Skype. There were a couple others, Europeans mostly, and thenHoward also invested.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now, were you investing mainly on Howard’s word? Draper: Pretty much, yes. Because he was doing a good job, as far as I could tell, and Ididn’t have time to go over before we invested, although I did later on. I waslooking after things here. So I let him decide. I didn’t go over and check outevery deal, because I didn’t have other people’s money that I was concernedabout, and I felt confident in this guy to do it right. I had helped him learn thebusiness. So then all of a sudden Skype started to take off, [laughs] and thenthey needed a bigger block of money. So we took it to Draper FisherJurvetson, since Tim had had a part in it. See, each of us had a part. I hiredHoward, Howard got direction from Tim and carried out the deal, so all threeof us were involved. Anyway, Draper Fisher Jurvetson put the bigger money 80in. Mine was a rather modest investment, but I got a thousand times mymoney back when we sold it to eBay for $2.5 billion. See, it only took, I don’tknow, something like $2.5 million, so it was a big hit.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: None of which you predicted. Draper: No, we couldn’t predict, but we knew the idea of peer to peer connection—to work over the Internet with no wires, and that we didn’t have to have aphone, we just needed to have a computer—was a great step forward incommunications. So everybody [who] had a computer, wanted to callsomebody else who had a computer, and that was the viral part of the thing.See, you live in London and I’m in the US, and I say, “Get on Skype. All youdo is sign up, and it’s free, and then I can have a free talk with you, and youwill benefit.” So that’s the viral part. In other words, so somebody else joinsSkype, and then they want to call somebody besides me, and they say, “Get onSkype. Sign up.” So pretty soon, this viral reaction sent the registered usersup—absolutely extraordinary growth. So before we knew it, we had 20million, 80 million. Now it’s something like 250 million people that are usingit. A lot of Indians and Chinese and others all over the world.Howard, after we made that investment, wanted to go back to the U.S. Hiskids were growing up; he wanted them to go to high school here. So I broughtHoward back to this office, because Robin had stopped coming in.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because of her children. Draper: She had four children in six years. So I said, “Why don’t you take her office?And let’s work here.” We, together, worked the Skype management, becausethey needed something in the US—some presence, some sales talent, some PRprograms. And so we really ended up levering up the power of Skype. Alltheir engineers are in Estonia, so it’s a very international deal. Theirheadquarters is in London; one’s from Denmark and one’s from Sweden;Estonia is where all the engineering talent is. Now they have outgrownEstonia because they ran out of engineers in Estonia. [laughs] They had about200 on the staff. It’s a wonderful, fast-moving story.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, both the stories that you told today, the Skype and the story about India,I’ve been struck at your willingness to put considerable trust in other people. Draper: In my partners.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes.  Draper: Well, part of my talent is finding, recognizing good talent, both in theentrepreneur and in my own partners—I pulled Pitch Johnson into thebusiness.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I know you did. Draper: And effectively got Paul Wythes trained in the business, and then got Robintrained in the business. They were all great, talented people—and nowHoward. They’re all really great people that just need to be given a little bit ofroom.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So can you sum up what you’re looking for when you’re sizing up a person? Draper: Well, for a venture capitalist, I think you want brain power and you wantenergy and you want personality. You want somebody who is going to attractpeople, because a good entrepreneur has more than one choice, typically, ofwhere he gets his venture capital. He’ll look at it as being his family, in a way.He’s not just looking for the money, if he’s good and smart. He’ll look for,what can you do for me? How can you help? And typically, he also isthinking, do I really want to work with this person on my board? Or am Igoing to be constantly answering nit-picking questions? Does this guy get thebig picture, or this gal get the big picture? Will I be comfortable? Will wehave a good time together? Because one of the things we stress whenever wetalk to entrepreneurs—we want to have fun! I have that feeling in the officehere—there are, I don’t know, ten people. We’ve got our foundation overhere, and we all mix it up. A big part of the idea of the office is we want tomake money, but we have fun before anything, almost. So the answer is those characteristics. It goes without saying you wantsomebody dead honest, and you want somebody that’s got really good ethics,and you want somebody who’s got a strong sense of pride in getting the jobdone. And then I didn’t mention the analytical side—just looked at a deal thismorning with Howard and a couple others. He’s got a very good idea, thisentrepreneur. He’s got a Caltech PhD and an MIT background. But I askedhim, “What happened at the company that you were at before, that you alsohad the creative idea to start? What are they going to say when I call thepresident of that company, whom you got as a CEO?” He says, “I like to startcompanies. I’ve got the creative genes and all that. But at a certain point, Iwant somebody else to run it.” So I said, “Well, what’s this CEO going tosay.” “Well, he’ll probably say we had something of a personality conflict.”So you’ve got to dig deep into that, because that’s going to be important—aleopard doesn’t change its spots.  So the analysis is not so much a paper analysis—although that’s important infiguring out what the market is and what your odds are of filling a need and allthat, what the size of the market is. All that’s important. But the heart of it istalking about the people with their bosses and people who have interactedwith them. If you call the boss and he says, “Well, I’d like to tell you all thisand this and this—.” Then you say, “Well, who else should I talk to abouthim?” Because that name was given to me, see. And then he says, “Well, talkto Sam.” Well, Sam says, “Bob couldn’t tell you this, but I will tell you thatthis guy is terrible in this respect.” But Bob, their wives are best friends orsomething. [laughs] Who knows? But the point is, you’ve got to do yourhomework on the people. That’s my attitude, that’s more important thananything. If you get a good person—sharp, talented, and has the leadershipskills, he or she is going to get you out of a problem with a bad product or aweak market. You’ll have better odds if things don’t go well. And in almostevery case, there are bumps along the way. I think Skype was an exception,until it merged with EBay. A lot of companies just need shaping. They get abump in the road and the leader falls apart, then you’ve got real problems andyou’ve got to solve those problems.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, and you do try to solve them, rather than dropping out? Draper: Sure. I’d say for the companies that we’re in, we do it wrong, almost all of usventure capitalists. We spend two-thirds of our time with companies that arenever going to make us much money. We may save the bucks that we’ve gotin it. We may get a double or something. But the one that is just taking off,potentially like a rocket, you kind of want to get out of the way and let themgo. On the other hand, there are ways you can help that company, and theleverage to help the really good ones would probably make you more moneythan the money you save by struggling day after day with problems of a sickcompany.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you have a rule of thumb, then, about how many deals you’re going to beinvolved in at a time? Draper: Yes, we probably have too many deals for the number of people that we’vegot. But we’ve brought in other people. I like to share. I always did. When Istarted Sutter Hill, I started it with the concept of sharing. Even though wemight have enough money to do the whole thing, we wanted to share becauseeach of us could bring different things to the table, contacts, marketknowledge or just plain wisdom—another venture capitalist, in other words,that’s reputable.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, another whole partnership.  Draper: Yes, so we would bring in others very happily—Sutter Hill and KleinerPerkins and Mayfield might do the deal together.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And Sutter Hill started that syndication idea? Draper: Well, yes, I would say we did. I would say we were very early anyway. But itwas a natural thing. For example, we had made an investment in PrimeComputer, and I went to see that investment in Boston. The vice president ofengineering came out to talk to me and he sat in the lobby with me and hesaid, “Well, confidentially, I want to start a new company.” So I said, “Well,why don’t you fly out and come to see us?” He flew out, and at lunch wemade the deal, because he was a brilliant guy, and we started a companycalled Apollo, which developed a big workstation computer. Eventually,Hewlett-Packard bought Apollo, and we made a big bundle of money on it.But I had taken it to Rockefellers, because I wanted somebody on the EastCoast to share it with us and do some work for them. And so thenRockefellers calls us with another deal and this kind of thing.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: This was a Sutter Hill deal. Draper: This was a Sutter Hill deal, yes.[End Audio File 7]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: We’re talking about technology without being too specific. We don’t need toget into all the technologies that you’ve invested in, because I’d be hereforever and you’d get bored. But where does your knowledge of thetechnology of the company you’re investing in enter into this whole mix ofthings that you’re considering? Draper: Right. I’m a history major from Yale University, so I’m not a technologist.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, we approve of that! [chuckling] Draper: Number one in the country, by the way. Not me, but Yale. I think you begin toget a feel for the terminology, the concepts, and some part of what ishappening in the technology, but I am the first to admit that I don’t understanda lot about the technology of the deals that we go into. But I use my—I usedto say Rolodex—but I use my friends and contacts extensively. Or if there’s somebody who’s a specialist in the field and I learn about it, I call that person.So I do that kind of research. Or I ask the entrepreneur to meet with so-and-so,who might be a specialist in that field, and then they give me feedback. Sothat’s the kind of high-level research that I do. [chuckling] That’s just not mystrength. There are people—and in fact, most—who want to get into venture capital—it’s a lot easier if you have a double-E degree, because most firms wantsomebody with a technical background. But a lot of the early days people hadfinancial backgrounds or something like that. Arthur Rock was an investmentbanker. Tommy Davis of Mayfield was a lawyer. It’s an interesting mix. I findthat some people, like Howard, Pitch Johnson and Paul Wythes, haveengineering backgrounds; but they never were engineers in the sense of filingfor patents or that kind of thing, so other aspects of their education came toplay. So they use some of that background, very helpfully, to understand whatthe entrepreneur’s talking about. I miss some of that, and Howard is my earson that one.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you think over the years, there has been a natural division of labor? Youobviously are very good at sizing up people and have a very strong intuitivesense, and then maybe some of the other people, like Paul Wythes, had astronger technical background. Draper: Paul is an example of a guy who’s a good sales personality, and I would sayhe’s not as geeky as Howard. Howard is a good salesman, too, but he isbrilliant technically. No company works well without a division of labor, asyou say. So there are all kinds of ways to do it in the entrepreneurial worldand the venture capital world. The answer is, you talk it over, you say, well,wait. What’s he doing? What are you doing? What should I be doing so wedon’t double up?Let me tell you of one early deal, just to describe how some of it works. Atarideveloped the game Pong, and a ball went back and forth on your televisionset, and you could play with those sticks. So these three guys came in and saidthat they wanted to make games for the computer—actually, for the Atarimechanism, not a computer. So I wasn’t so sure. So they said, “Well, take thishome with you.” I had a computer with tape on it. Not disks, but tape, oldfashioned, really old fashioned, which my wife bought for me from RadioShack. I got this bridge game, and it was great. The diamonds were red andthe clubs were black. I said to myself, God, this is fun. With the computer, Icould play bridge; we didn’t need four people, I just played by myself, and itwould deal me a hand and I’d play the hand. So I thought, this is the neatestthing! So we had to back it.  So we started this company called Activision—got to be a big company.These three guys were all very geeky game guys—GGG, geeky game guys.[<|endoftext|>
Interviewer laughs] And I said, “We need somebody to sort of manage theplace.” So there’s a good fellow named Jim Levy who came from, I think,Time Warner. Anyway, he came looking for a job, and so I introduced himand they got along fine, and so that was the team of four. So we launchedActivision, and Sutter Hill made a lot of money on it and felt very good aboutit, and everybody felt good about it. The team grew and a division of laborwas essential. As an aside, I educated myself on Activision. I said, “I could probably dosomething with this computer beside play games.” So we had a Valentine’sparty at my house, and I said, “I’m going to program this so that they’ll cometo the party and they will be assigned to their dinner partner, depending onhow they answer these three questions.” So I was having a lot of fun with this.I got this whole program all set, and the party was, let’s say, a couple of daysaway, and my wife said, “Now, come on, leave your computer.” I’d been thereall morning, half the afternoon. “Come on, leave your computer and let’s gofor a walk.” So I said, “Perfect, because I’m just at the perfect point.” I pusheda button and I erased everything that I had on there. Oh, my God! [laughter] So I went on the walk, and then I came back and I had to redo it. But I learnedsomething so that’s called programming. I really did do a little programming,but I couldn’t do it today.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And you were figuring that out on your own? Draper: Yes, but [laughs] you have an instruction book at that point. Computers werevery different. It was a tape thing with reel to reel, the tape would break andyou’d have all kinds of problems. But I was trying to learn something aboutthe business that I was in. Basically, it was rudimentary, a research thing. No,I could not do any programming today.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Once you’ve invested the money and you’re trying to get this company off theground and working in a way that you think is going to be efficient andprofitable, what are you doing to actually build this company? If it’s easier topick a specific company, that’s fine, too. Draper: Right. I can give you two examples. One, I was on vacation in Chicago and Icalled on a friend of mine, and he said, “Look up Dave Bossen when you getback to the West Coast.” Dave was a very accomplished management guy outof the Middle West, in a company that made a product that sensed thethickness and moisture content of paper in motion. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, yes, you talked about it. Measurex. Draper: So he was accomplished manager. And so backing him, what I did for himwas to help him find some people at Stanford who had some technologybackground to build the product. I also remember saying to him in a boardmeeting, “Hey, you maybe ought to spend more on getting the service portionof the business going, and make that a profit center. Or he was running out ofmoney and you know he’s got a great product, a great team, everything’sgoing well, but he just needed more money. So we introduced him to someother people that would put in follow-on money. That’s the kind of thing thatyou do for an accomplished manager who knows what he’s doing. He sets itup, you go there, you feel very comfortable. You’re sitting in good officeswhere the things are going right; he takes you down to the plant, you see whathe’s building; and you meet his team and they’re all professionals. That’s onekind. Another is a guy I may have mentioned. Pitch and I started a company calledElectroglas, and they made a diffusion furnace for the semiconductor industry.This is a guy who learned how to do that at Fairchild. He came out and heknew how to put that product together, but he didn’t know beans aboutrunning a company. So we matched him up with Chuck Gravelle, a fellowwho’d, of all things, run the marketing for a boat company in Minnesota, hehad to leave because he made so much money by putting one ad in Lifemagazine that said, “If you want to have a franchise, send us an order for oneboat.” And all of a sudden this little company in Minnesota blossomed. Heblew the entire budget that the president of the company had given him on thisone ad. And it worked. So he came out here looking for a job. He didn’t knowanything about electronics or anything technological. So we pieced themtogether, and we liked Gravelle. We liked him very much, and the other guynamed Arthur Lash, he was fine with it because he really just wanted to do thetechnical stuff. Chuck was the CEO and a great marketing guy and they builtthe company together. But in the beginning, we were running out of money and we got down toabout six people in the company. It was a question of whether we kept thestock boy or not and had a board meeting [laughs] to try and decide how deepwe’re going to cut. Pitch and I were actively sweating over that deal to try andget it to run, because we didn’t, in those days, have another way to go to otherpeople to get more money. We had put so much money in and we were unableto do more. Both of us spent a lot of time just moaning through the variousproblems and questions and getting this little team to start. Then all of asudden it takes off, and then you spend less time and you go to the boardmeeting once a month and you’re briefed and you really know things are ingood hands. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So the time sinks, as you said before, are the companies that are not taking off. Draper: Yes, that’s usually it but our time spent on Electroglas paid off. Now, I got acall from another venture capitalist a week ago, two weeks ago. He said, “Canyou come to the city, San Francisco, to meet with this team of three whobasically are pulling a mutiny on the CEO? And they say it’s either him orus.” So this is Saturday morning, and I said sure. So the two of us sat withthese guys all morning, as they told us all the bad things that the CEO wasdoing, even though he had had a good record at the place he came from. Iwon’t go into the names of this, but—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But did you agree that they were right? Draper: So we did. In the final analysis, we wanted to do it quickly, so the next weekwe fired the CEO. He’s still on the board. He’s still a friend—I think. But wewere faced with this; what do we do? You’ve got to be able to get theconfidence of the people you’re working with if you’re the leader. So we’llsee how that goes. We don’t know how that’s going to go.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, but you have to be willing, it sounds to me, to make some very harddecisions every once in a while. Draper: Oh, yes. Sure. The biggest problem, typically, is that you don’t move fastenough. You say, “Geez, we should’ve made that change so long ago! Weknew he wasn’t right, but we kept giving him the benefit of the doubt. Themoney kept drifting out the door and—.” Now, they have a phrase—you’reburning so much money. I hate that term, because you want them to beinvesting, not burning the money. “What’s your monthly burn rate?” Venturecapitalists all over say the same thing. They shouldn’t really, because [laughs]it sounds like, well, I’m burning $400,000 this month; I think maybe$300[,000] next month, if we cut way back.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You don’t like it because it sounds like wasted money. Draper: Correct. You want to say how much are you spending. You are losing money,so that the point is there’s no revenue. But how much are your expenses goingto be this month? That’s what we used to say in the old days. This burn moneyis a term that has come in since Wall Street took over Silicon Valley. A lot ofWall Street money has come out here. There’s a lot of wrestling with personnel issues. We spend some time on howmany options each should get and that kind of thing, after you’ve structured the deal. But then you find out some perform brilliantly; or somebody quits,and you’ve got to get somebody else in. Then there often is restructuring. There was another case where there were a group of Indians, and a very finewoman came in as the CEO, Hewlett-Packard background and all. She did agreat job of straightening up the look of the place and the organized feel to it.But then they got to the point where they weren’t closing sales. Again, I don’twant to go into the details of what company, but they weren’t closing deals.She wasn’t closing, the marketing team, which was pretty good—onemarketing [person] was not an Indian, but the others were. You had thefeeling, well, there’s kind of a cultural thing that she’s having problems with. But eventually, we needed new funding, so we got two new venture firms tocome in, and we all together made the decision that she wasn’t right. Shehadn’t gone out to close sales as president and that was needed without havingthe HP brand. She didn’t know the customers. She was good on organizationwithin the inside walls of the company, but not a driving force in the market.So we changed managements there, in that situation. So you have thatproblem. With a good management in place, they usually use us for contacts.Do you know somebody in Hewlett-Packard, or in Google that we can talk to?Or somebody at Wells Fargo? And we often do. Yes, I know the CEO ofWells Fargo, and Chevron, and the management wants to get in there to get agood appointment for some sales reason. Good management makes good useof venture capitalists and their contacts. I have this crazy deal called Prolacta [Bioscience], that’s kind of trying to dowhat the Baxter company does. Baxter gets blood from the Red Cross andbottles it in plasma form and sells it to the hospitals. Women used to give milkto milk banks, and it was used for babies that had mothers that didn’t haveenough milk. It was a big thing fifty years ago, twenty years ago, even. Theyclosed up, most of them, because HIV/AIDS came in, and mothers didn’twant any other woman’s milk for her baby. So then we figured out that what we could do is, in a sense, pasteurize or cleanup the milk. So we built a factory in Los Angeles, and the idea was to gatherthe mother’s milk from those who were willing to give their milk to helpbabies in a neonatal situation where they’re getting Nestlé’s formula. Nestlé’sgives the milk away. It’s a little bit of a problem, because we’re selling ours.But any kind of small baby, pound-and-a-half, needs very delicate feeding.Just intuitively, you can see that mother’s milk is a lot better. Doctors agreewith this, but there’s a big bureaucracy in every hospital and decisions of thiskind take forever to make. Anyway, we backed this company, started it up, called Prolacta. It wentthrough all kinds of problems. The first problem was that I backed thisvisionary woman who had started a breast pump company and she had theidea of this one, too. Her partner was a guy who I thought was pretty solid, but he turns out to be a little weak on judgment. He wanted to get a phone into theoffice and the connection had to go through another office, but the phonepeople were coming there on a Saturday. So he broke into their office. Well,of course, the police and everything. She is the CEO, so she says, “Well, Ifired him.” Well, I thought, oh, my God! He was the business management ofthis embryo of a company. So I’m flying down there and we have nomanagement. Then I contacted a guy who I had worked with in another venture and askedhim to help. He went down there for weeks at a time. Then one day she says,“Well, I fired him.” And I had faith in him. More problems. We needed moremoney. It helps, actually, when that happens. We were able to makemanagement changes. And we got a CEO from Baxter, and that’s workingwell. Before we got that solved, the woman that had given us great advice aboutthese milk banks that she’d helped organize getting the milk in, well, she andthis visionary woman had a cat fight and, “I never want to talk to her again.”Then we found that women were not coming right forward with their extramilk. “Oh, it’s for a company making money. There’s something wrong withthat.” Then two women who had the idea of doing this on the Internet, andthey call themselves “Two Maids a-Milking,” saved us on the quantity. Nowmonths. We have the whole supply system organized over the Internet. But the next problem was that the hospitals were not really just jumping at it.They want to see tests. They want to make sure it’s safe and better.Meanwhile, we’ve saved lives of a lot of little kids in various incidents andexperimental use, where they have no other choice, and the baby’s dyingbecause it’s got some kind of a problem in his stomach and needs mother’smilk. So anyway, there’s this company called Prolacta, down in southernCalifornia. I don’t know if they’ll make it or not, but I brought some of mygood friends into it. I felt more pain because I had these good friends in and Iworried whether we’re going to pull this company out. Then we got a very fine venture capitalist here in the city to come in, whoknows a lot about the general field of selling to hospitals, and so on. I wastelling this story and all the background to the [Ewing Marion] KauffmanFoundation which helps get more venture capitalists into the system, becausethe guy who founded it thought that more venture capital would be good forentrepreneurship. Good idea, Kauffman Foundation. If a venture capitalcompany will hire them, they’ll pay half the salary or something. It’s that kindof thing. Every year they have a class of these young men and women andthey all meet.So I went to talk with them and I gave a little description of Prolacta, all theproblems we were having with this thing. Turns out that one of the men in the 90audience had joined the venture firm that had just brought $10 million into thecompany! [laughter] And he said, “Geez, we didn’t know there were all thoseproblems with it.” I had been saying how bad it was and how lucky they werethat we got the problems solved, because the new management is very good.So management’s really important. You are hit with surprises quite often inthat regard. The coup that I described earlier—that was a total surprise. We thoughteverybody was getting along like gangbusters in the company. It seemed to bedoing very well, and everything was rosy until we learned what was reallygoing on. But you’ve got to be empathetic, because these entrepreneurs are theones that are making the money for you. They’re the ones that are doing thework. You’ve got to be very empathetic to their problems when they tell youthat things are going astray—“you’ve got to do something about this, you’vegot to help me with this.” You think, well, gee, they ought to be solving theirown problems. The divorce rate is higher than any other profession that Iknow, because they’re working fifteen hours a day sometimes, and their wifenever sees them, and wonders— It’s very difficult. There’s a lot of tension instarting up a company. There are a lot of personality problems that theentrepreneur has got to adjust to. Some can do that well and others, who areused to working for a big company in a high-tech field, perhaps don’t havethat human characteristic of flexibility in working with other people. There arelots of reasons that the entrepreneur is under tremendous pressure, so youhave to be very sensitive to those needs. When I say the entrepreneur, itwouldn’t just be the CEO, but I’m [also] talking about the VP of marketingand the rest of the top team—VP of engineering et al.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do most entrepreneurs expect management expertise from the venturecapitalist, as well as money? Draper: Yes, I think the best entrepreneurs will sort out who the venture capitalcommunity is and who the best in it are for their particular situation. So thereare a couple of aspects to that. The best entrepreneurs will interview severalventure capitalists and make a selection. One example of that is Bill Gatescame down to talk to us when he was looking for$1 or $2 million forMicrosoft. We wanted to do the deal very much. There was no question aboutwhat the price was; he had set that price. He was interviewing, and heinterviewed us and he interviewed two other firms.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now, was this early in the game? Draper: Oh, yes. Otherwise, he wouldn’t worry about $1 or $2 million. This was veryearly in the game. But there was a man who is now at August Capital, whohad worked for us for one summer in Sutter Hill. God! The big mistake was we didn’t offer him the moon to stay with us. Instead, we hardly noticed him.He was putting our computer system together in the summer, and also doing aproject for one of our companies, and I didn’t see much of him myself. DaveMarquardt is his name. He’s now a very good venture capital[ist]. He hadroomed with [Steven A.] Ballmer, the partner of Bill Gates. So whenMarquardt joined Burt McMurtry’s firm they got the inside track. That was avery good hire. Because that’s the one they went with, but we made a pitchand we were excited about making the investment. Gates was twenty-nineyears old. He’s a pretty amazing guy. I have watched his career as he marcheson to become the richest man in the world.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But may I ask a question, though, about? Are you saying, then, that even attwenty-nine, Bill Gates was really savvy and looking you over? Draper: Yes, absolutely. Gates was confirming the quality of Marquardt’s firm. Wedidn’t look that much better. It was kind of a check on them. That was it. Welooked about like them, so we lost a big fish. Another story of the big fish that got away: I hired a guy named Len Baker, atSutter Hill. He is still there as a partner. He’s a very good venture capitalist. Itold you earlier that we had taken Apollo to Rockefeller. They were payingme back, and they called me about Apple Computer—Peter Crisp was thepartner. They weren’t even called Venrock then, they were called theRockefellers. He called and said, “We have this deal called Apple Computer.”And I said, “Great.” “We’ve got a million dollars which we have not placed.”Let’s say it’s a $4 million deal or something like that. “And we’re going to putin two and Art [Arthur] Rock’s going to put in one. Do you want to invest?”Wow, that sounds great. So I made a big mistake. I sent Len Baker, who had just been with us aboutthree months, down to look at it. Len came back and he said, “Well, the guykept me waiting about a half-hour. Then I met him, and he’s very arrogant,and it’s a $19 million value.” The valuation was $19 million. So I said,“Len—” I was trying to train him—what a stupid thing, to train him on a dealthat the Rockefellers sent me [chuckling]. I said, “Well, okay, if you don’tthink it’s the right thing to do, we won’t do it.” Boy, oh boy, what a mistakethat was! Of course, that was Steve Jobs, who is so good that he has a lot to bearrogant about. He’s the only guy that I know that ran two public companiesat once, Pixar and Apple—was fired from Apple at one point and called backin because they were screwing up so badly.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, Mr. Draper, I think you’ve made up for it. [laughs] Draper: Yes. But I’ll tell you, that was a big mistake! <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I’ll bet there are not too many people are turning you down these days.[chuckling] Draper: No, but it was fun to look back on that and be able to talk about it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: We haven’t talked about track record and reputation. Surely, that’s importantin this field. Draper: It’s very important, yes. The deals you do come back, because they say,“Well, you did the Measurex deal, this is good. I like that.” Or, “You did theLSI Logic and we’ve got another semiconductor company.” We did onecompany called Priam [Corporation], and then we backed another disk drivecompany that got to be very, very big, a $2 billion [company].<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And this is all at Sutter Hill? Draper: Yes, Sutter Hill. Well, more recently, I can brag about Skype. The peoplecome in and say, “Gee, well, this is a lot like Skype. You know about that, soyou can help.” That kind of thing. We backed Athena. Recently, one of ourDraper Richards companies has gone public, called Athena Health. GoldmanSachs took it public in December, and we were lucky, because now the publicmarket has dried up. It’s doing very well; it’s running about a $100-milliondollar rate. The way I got into that was through politics. I backed GeorgeH.W. Bush and was in New Hampshire knocking on doors for him years ago.I met his nephew, who was seventeen years old, out with signs. He was acharming kid. So when he called me, the boy, Jonathan [S.] Bush, and said, “I’m starting acompany,”—he had gone to Harvard Business School at that point—it waspretty easy to make a decision that I wanted to go with him, because I knewhis energy level and brains. He had a good idea, which was the back officemanagement of medical clinics, so Athena does everything but medical stuff.In other words, he’ll do the insurance, the billing, all this, all over the Internet.It’s taken a long time. I think Draper Richards did that deal seven years ago.They just went public in December. But you start up a company from a rawstart, and you’ve just got two guys in the office and some money, and you’retrying to make a company out of it, and it takes a long time, typically. So thattook seven years. But now, it was a ten to one for us, something like that. Tentimes our investment. So that isn’t a great deal, but it’s a good one. We have another company that went public fairly recently called DivX, thathad a very creative president but certain management problems, and so on.They were solving those and things really went well, and they went public. They had gotten into a business called Stage6, which put up your little videoclips. It was kind of an entertainment thing. But there wasn’t any revenuecoming. The DivX part of it, the basic money-making part, was somethingcalled codec, compression of digital information. So that on most DVDs now,you’ll see that it’s a DivX inside kind of thing. It’s a good company. You getinto all kinds of things. But the top management is the key to the wholething—nothing more important than the person that’s running the company.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, that might be a good place to end. Draper: All right. I think so, too.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Are there any final thoughts that you want to impart? Draper: No, but Silicon Valley is so lucky, starting with Stanford. I don’t think there’dbe a Silicon Valley without Stanford. So we get in the habit of giving back, soa lot of us write checks to Stanford. But now the whole of Silicon Valley isgetting in the spirit of giving back in a broader sense. The best thing I’vedone, I think—and maybe the thing that I’ll do in my next stage of life is toreally focus on it: we started a foundation called Draper Richards Foundation,and we’ve got two wonderful women from Stanford Business School runningit now. The idea is just like venture capital. You start out an entrepreneurwho’s got a light in his eye, or her eye, and a vision of doing something big,and brain power, and energy, and a willingness to commit their life to it. Wegive them three years of money and attention—it’s got to be the biggestmoney they ever got—and it’s not very big money; it’s like $100,000 a yearfor three years. Then at the end of three years, they’re on their own. But during that three years, these gals go on the board, they help them getmoney, they help them get, let’s say, more management, more contacts, putthe board of directors together—help them in every way they can. At the endof three years, they’re out, they’re graduates of our Draper Richards FellowsProgram. We get them together once a year, and they all share ideas, and theycome out here, and we have experts from outside on different tech topics. Andthat has been really exciting. We did three a year to start, and then four a year;now it’s about six a year that we’re doing. And we just love the wholecon[cept]. One was Room to Read. Ours was their first big money. They now buildthousands of libraries and hundreds of schools in Asia and Africa and theirbudget is $29 million. The fellow wrote a book called Leaving Microsoft toSave the World. Another is a woman that helps immigrants that are not in theirsweet spot, and they’re driving a bus and they’ve got an MD or a double E ora PhD or something. And so we have volunteers that help get them organized. We have one called Little Kids Rock, where kids in grammar school gettogether because a teacher in fourth grade is willing to work with them afterschool. Then if they are, we sign that teacher up, and we give her or him allthe instruments that they need for a band, and if they’re still at it at the end ofthe school year, they get to keep their instruments. That’s been a bonanza,Little Kids Rock. Another is helping hook AIDS knowledge into soccer inAfrica, it’s called Grassroots Soccer. They’re all over the map. We helped start Kiva, which is microlending over the Internet, so that you canlend $50 to a mechanic, or somebody that’s got a business to, say, repairbicycles in Ghana, or a woman that’s running a laundry in Kathmandu. Herface will come up and a little bit about her and everything. We work throughmicrolending organizations around the world. Kiva was just two youngStanford graduates who had the idea of filling in the long tail, they call it, ofmicrolending. Instead of big blocks of money, this is to let somebody who hasthe heart and a small purse connect with somebody in China that needs help,and putting all that together over the internet. They’re just taking off like arocket. Several of these [fellows] have appeared on the Oprah Winfrey Show.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So the idea is to get the organization on its feet, and then they have to go italone? Draper: Just get it started. Then they’re on their own at the end of three [years]. TheRoom to Read fellow, John Wood, has broken all records. We gave him hisfirst $100,000. This year he’s on a $29 million budget. Isn’t that amazing?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: My heavens! Draper: And the woman with the immigration program started in the Bay Area, had along struggle for several years, and then all of a sudden it broke loose. She’snow in New York and Boston, thinking about Chicago. They’re all different.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Where does the money for the foundation come from? Draper: That’s personal—Robin and I. My son, Tim Draper, has just started to add tothe endowment. It’s just our money, now. Maybe we will bring in others later.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I can see why that makes you feel good. Draper: Oh, yes! It’s great. It’s getting to be even more fun that venture capital, whichis more fun than eating ice cream! <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, Mr. Draper, it’s been a real pleasure for me. Draper: Well, I feel the same way.
Interviewer: We’re in Mr. Bossen’s home, and it is July 8, 2010. Mr. Bossen is so far ourone and only entrepreneur in the venture capital series. Let’s start at thebeginning, namely where you were born and a little about the family that yougrew up in. Bossen: I grew up in Clinton, Iowa, where I was born January 9, 1927. My mother,Rose, and father August were a bit older than normal. My father was sixtywhen I was born, and my mother was thirty-seven, which was quite unusualfor those days. He had been and she had been something of entrepreneursthemselves. He had started a small chain of movie theaters in downstateIllinois. He founded them during the 1920s and sold them off in the early1930s.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Before the Depression. Bossen: Well, the Depression had started in 1930, (and he got out) but it was notharming the movies, strangely enough. It was a great escape place, and it costten cents to get a ticket in those days. But then my dad died when I was twelveyears old.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you know how they came to be in the theater business. Bossen: A little bit. Dad had owned a jewelry store and was a watchmaker prior tothat, and my mother was a professional musician. She was an organist. Sheplayed the largest pipe organ in the world, which is still in existence at theChicago theater. Before talkies came in, they had the organ playing along withthe film, and she played that big pipe organ. I don’t know how they met, butthey were together in the 1920s in Chicago, and they were married, I think, inthe early twenties.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you are an only child. Bossen: I am an only child.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What was it like growing up in that family?. Bossen: Well, after my dad died, my mother and I moved in with her mother, mygrandmother. And her sister, my aunt, was also there. So I was raised in amatriarchal society from age [chuckling] eleven or twelve and thereafter.Clinton, Iowa was a great place, as I look back on it, to have a childhood andgrow up. It was on the Mississippi River. It was a mile wide at that point, andwe would go out fishing. We weren’t supposed to, but we went swimming inthe Mississippi.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Weren’t supposed to because it was dangerous. Bossen: Yes, well, that was the theory. And in fact, I had a cousin who drowned in it, asecond cousin. But it was a good place to grow up. We lived in the northernend of Clinton, in what originally was a separate town called Lyons, Iowa, andthen it merged into Clinton sometime in there. We had small schools becausewe were in that end of town. I think we had about sixty in my graduatingclass.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And this was a public school. Bossen: Oh yes. I graduated in June of 1945, and of course World War II was still hotand heavy, so all of the young men, boys, went in the service right away. Iwent in the Marine Corps and stayed there for one year, and from the marinesI got a fleet appointment to the Naval Academy.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, step back a minute, please, because I’m interested in what thisentrepreneurial streak in the family might have meant to you. Bossen: I never really thought about it. [chuckling] But I think it gave me the ambitionto strike out on my own.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did your mother continue to work after your father died. Bossen: Oh yes. Yes, she just became a clerk in the store. They ultimately lost most oftheir money.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because of the Depression? Or was it more complicated. Bossen: It was more complicated. They were swindled, but they had managed to keepit through the crash. One of my mother’s sisters was going with a guy inWashington. She was living there. He had this idea that he knew where they were going to build the George Washington Bridge, and if you knew where itwas going to be built, you could buy the land on the approaches, and it wouldgreatly increase in value. So this fellow got a lot of people to give him moneyto buy up the options on the land where he “knew” it was going to be built. Itturned out he was right. The problem was, he hadn’t invested the money inthat. He’d spent it on fast women and slow horses. [<|endoftext|>
Interviewer chuckles] So myparents and a lot of other people lost a lot of money with Uncle Charlie.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So that was the reason for your mother getting the sales position. Bossen: Yes, right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you becoming interested in any particular field as you went throughschool. Bossen: Well, besides my mother, a woman who had a very large influence on me washer sister, whose name before she was married was Carolyn Nichols, and aftershe was married, Carolyn Eberhart. She married a guy named Bill Eberhartwho was a marvelous guy. He was a finance guy, and he did quite well inmanaging the financial operations of some corporations. She got me interestedin management, because she ultimately became one of the first successfulwomen executives in manufacturing. In fact, there was a big article on her inthe Chicago Tribune in the early forties—about her accomplishments as awoman executive. She became vice president of manufacturing in a companycalled Climax Engineering, in Clinton, Iowa. And Climax Engineering madebig V-12 oilfield diesel engines. It was big, heavy equipment stuff, and theyhad a big foundry and machine shop and the rest of it there, and she managedthis.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Very unusual for a woman. Bossen: Well, she started out as a secretary and worked for the guy who was CEO.Then World War II came along, and a lot of the men went in the service, andshe was left there, and she was doing it, so she ultimately, as I said, becamevice president of manufacturing. Bill Eberhart, her husband, was the VP offinance for the company, and that’s how they got together. She pushed me andincented me to get into management training.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And. Bossen: Well, I left the Naval Academy after three years. I didn’t finish. I banged myknee up plebe year playing football, and by second-class year I was not getting around in the obstacle course too well. So they called me in and said,“Bossen, we’re going to have to operate on that knee, but we have to tell youregardless whether we do or not that you can go ahead and graduate, but youwon’t get a line commission. You’ll have to serve in the supply corps.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because of the injury. Bossen: Yes. Well, line officers in the marine corps have to be able to charge up hillsand stuff like that. They told me that, so I said, “Thanks. I’m out of here.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why had you entered Annapolis in the first place. Bossen: I got a fleet appointment from the marines.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What does that mean. Bossen: Well, you get into the academy in a couple of different ways. First of all,every senator and representative can appoint one person a year into theacademy, I think. I don’t know how it works exactly. And the second way is,the navy and the marine corps can appoint a certain number, and these arecalled fleet appointments. At that point I was stationed at Philadelphia NavyYard and going to radio op[eration]s school for the marines. And Saturdaynight we were doing a big cleanup for the colonel’s inspection the next day,and they had posted a notice that anyone who wanted to be considered to go tothe Naval Academy prep school should, as they say, lay below and see thecaptain. So I did that. It was better than washing windows, I thought. And hebasically said, “Well, you look like you’ve got the right stuff.” I had scoredvery well on the basic test that they give everyone who goes in the service. Itused to be called the AGCT [Army General Classification Test], and I don’tremember what those initials stand for.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was it like the current SAT. Bossen: Yes, it was. Well, they were not trying to look at knowledge; they were tryingto look at intelligence. So I got sent down to the Naval Academy prep school,where the service sent their enlisted people so that they could take the test,which was very much like the SAT—an entrance exam for the academy. I hadnever had chemistry in high school. They didn’t offer it in Lyons, Iowa. Theywere teaching us basic chemistry in this class, but I was only in it for about amonth so I didn’t pick up much, and then the exam came along. Some of theanswers were perfectly obvious, so I answered the ones that I could. The rest of them I marked the C column all the way down, and it passed! [laughter] Sowhen in doubt, say C!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: A lesson early learned. Bossen: Yes, so that’s how I got in the academy. And when I left the academy, I wentto MIT.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It was an honor, of course, to be at Annapolis. Bossen: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you just take it in stride that you weren’t going to graduate. Bossen: Oh yes. Sure. No question.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why MIT? How did that come about. Bossen: Well, I applied to two schools, Yale and MIT. I was admitted to both, and Iwanted to go to Yale because my girlfriend was at Vassar, and that was veryconvenient to New Haven. [chuckling] But dear Aunt Carrie, who I mentionedearlier said, “Well, you of course can go where you want to go, but if youwant any help from me, you’d better go to MIT because you’re a poor boy,and you have to make a living afterward, and those Yale kids are all prettywell off.” That’s why I went to MIT.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: MIT in those days pulled from a diverse social system. Bossen: Oh yes.The course I went into was initially called business and engineeringadministration—a horrible name. And while I was there, they changed thename to the School of Industrial Management. And a couple of years later,they changed it again to the Sloan School of Management because Mr. Sloanhad by that time given them the money, so he had a school named for him.[laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] Were you thinking at this point more about a business career asopposed to an engineering career?. Bossen: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And why was that. Bossen: I just thought I would enjoy management more than I would enjoy designingvalves, for example.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But the fact that you were in that business course didn’t preclude takingtechnical courses. Bossen: Well, of course I had three years at the Naval Academy, which was largelyengineering.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And that was your choice? Or that’s just what happened when you went toAnnapolis. Bossen: The only elective that you had then was language.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Really. Bossen: And I took Russian. The reason I chose Russian was that about half of myclass had already had two years of college before they entered the NavalAcademy, and they had all taken a couple of years of German or French orSpanish or something. I thought, I will be smart; I will take Russian becauseno one will have had that, and I’ll start out even. Big mistake. I walked in thefirst day in class, and there were a whole bunch of White Russian descendantsthere, jabbering away! [chuckling] But I’ve always been glad that I’ve taken itbecause it was interesting.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I didn’t realize that there was such a strong emphasis on engineering atAnnapolis. Bossen: Oh yes. Both that and West Point. They’re basically engineering schools.Now, subsequently, ten maybe fifteen years ago, I don’t know when they didit, but they broadened it out so that now you could get liberal arts degreesthere as well as engineering, and you could major in fine arts and things likethat. I don’t understand why they did it. A naval officer aboard ship needs toknow engineering a lot more than he needs to know about Plato. [chuckling] <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What happened at MIT? You took basically business courses, right. Bossen: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: People speak of Harvard’s case method way of teaching. Bossen: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is there something characteristic about what became the Sloan School. Bossen: Yes, they use cases, but it’s not like Harvard.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And did it serve you in good stead. Bossen: Yes, very good.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: In what sorts of ways. Bossen: I learned about marketing. Before I went there, I thought marketing was thefarmer is taking his eggs to market. [laughter] And so I had marketing, and thefinance courses were very good, and I even took a cost accounting course,which was very helpful.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you did have some leeway in your course selection. Bossen: Oh yes, at MIT you did have selection.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was there some competition with Harvard. Bossen: Probably.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But you weren’t worried about that. Bossen: No.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you make connections there that later served you well?. Bossen: Yes, with a couple of the professors. And of course I had friends in the studentbody, but I don’t recall anything coming about with former students.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you taking all this in your stride? MIT is a rigorous place. Bossen: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You didn’t have any difficulty fitting in and doing the work. Bossen: No. I made dean’s list right away. In fact, in many ways, I found the NavalAcademy more difficult academically than MIT. But I think it was because ofthe courses I was taking and my background when I got there.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because you’d come straight from high school. Bossen: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And you were probably the real exception there. Bossen: Well, straight from high school and from a small Iowa high school.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: None of this was intimidating. Bossen: I was concerned about doing the work, but I felt I could do it, and I did it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And you obviously could. You made dean’s list.Can you summarize the approach that the predecessor of the Sloan Schooltook? Was it a very hands-on kind of education. Bossen: Well, I would contrast it with the Naval Academy. At the Naval Academy,most courses you recited every day. You had a reading assignment for thatday, lecture, and then they would say, “Man the boards.” You would go to theblackboard, and there’d be a slip there with four questions on it, and you hadto write the answers to those four questions on the blackboard. And if you gotthree of them right you passed, and if you got less than three right, you failed![laughter] Very simple. So you had to keep up. You were doing it daily. AtMIT, it was, we don’t care if you ever come to class. You just have to pass the exams. And it was totally a different situation. But I think, because I had theNaval Academy background, I did the work day by day, didn’t get behind.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, tell me what happens after you graduated from MIT. Bossen: I got a job with Alcoa at their new rolling mill in Davenport, Iowa. And thereason I took that job was that my mother was getting on, and she was inClinton, Iowa, which was nineteen miles away. So I could live at home withher and drive back and forth to Davenport Works. So I was with Alcoa for sixmonths, and I was terminally bored. [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What were you doing. Bossen: Industrial engineering.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What was boring about it. Bossen: Well, Alcoa was a fine company but very bureaucratic, and if I’d stayed withthem thirty years, I might have made a plant manager someplace, or industrialengineering director, but it was just too bureaucratic. And about this time,after I was there six months, I got a call from a good friend from MIT, whodid help me. In fact, he got me out of Alcoa and into a small startup inColumbus, Ohio that was called Industrial Nucleonics, doing the peacetimeatom and all that stuff. His name was Karl Cooperrider, and he got me outthere, and I interviewed with him, and they offered me a job, and I took a jobas their first manager of market research.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Wow. At what age. Bossen: Well, it was a very small company, you understand. It was a startup. Igraduated in ’51—that would have been ’52—twenty-five.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now, did he know that you were dissatisfied at Alcoa. Bossen: No. He just called me up one day and said, “Hey, we’ve got this opportunityout here, and I thought about you. Why don’t you come out and meet us?” SoI got in the car and drove out and saw him. I was married at this point, and mywife thought this was the most marvelous thing that had ever happened—gother out of Clinton, Iowa! [chuckling] Columbus, Ohio sounded like a real city.She was from LA originally. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, she knew there was another world. Bossen: Yes, a different world. So that’s how I got with Industrial Nucleonics.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What were you seeing at Industrial Nucleonics other than a way of gettingaway from Alcoa. Bossen: I thought it was a great opportunity because they were developing sensorbased control systems, analog. They developed systems to measure, forexample, the thickness of— Well, I came from Alcoa, so aluminum while it’sbeing rolled, without touching it. You shot beta rays through it from a nuclearisotope, and you could measure the thickness directly without touching it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that new? Had Alcoa been using. Bossen: No, they had not been. This was new. This all came out after World War II,and isotopes became available. Radioisotopes were not available before thattime.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That’s interesting because the AEC [Atomic Energy Commission] was prettymuch controlling the distribution of radioisotopes at that time. Bossen: They were, yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So was Industrial Nucleonics buying its radioisotopes from the AEC. Bossen: Yes. But then we had other companies that would take the radioisotope itselfand encapsulate it. Very dangerous stuff. If you ingested any strontium-90, forexample, it’s a bone seeker and causes bone cancer in you ultimately.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And did you know all that? Was the hazard of radioisotopes known at thetime. Bossen: Yes—oh, that was well known, well known. But we never handled the rawisotopes there. Nor did we later at Measurex. We bought—we acquired themfrom the AEC, and they shipped them to a supplier company. One was U.S.Radium. They specialized in taking the isotopes and putting them inhermetically sealed capsules. So then we only handled the capsules. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Which were impenetrable to whichever the radiation was. Bossen: No, no! You want the radiation to come out. That’s how you use it!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Okay, well how are you protecting yourself then? I thought this was a safetything. Bossen: [indicating with sheets of paper] That much paper will stop beta rays totally.They are not very penetrative. Gamma rays are a different kettle of fish.Depending on the energy of the gamma ray, they can be quite penetrating. Butno, if you understand how this works, it isn’t a problem. You design theequipment so that the radioactive source is just in the small source unit andwell shielded, and directly above it you put the detector, and generally you fixit so people can’t even put their fingers in between. And even if you did, youwouldn’t get any serious effect from the beta rays unless you left your fingersthere for a very long time.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How did the AEC transport its radioisotopes. Bossen: They transported them in lead-lined containers. You would do this work underhoods, glass-covered hoods, that would have a negative pressure, so thatnothing comes out.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But Industrial Nucleonics wasn’t doing that. Bossen: No. They were only handling sealed sources. Industrial Nucleonics was usinganalog computers and analog controls to make the measurements and controlsystems that then, when I founded Measurex, we did digitally. I stayed atIndustrial Nucleonics for fifteen years.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, don’t go too fast. [chuckling. Bossen: Sorry.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It seems to me that Industrial Nucleonics is a starting point for what you’regoing to spend much of your life doing. Bossen: Yes. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So what were you doing at Industrial Nucleonics. Bossen: I started, as I said, in market research, and then I went into sales, and I cameout here to California and opened up the entire West Coast market. We wereselling these systems to companies like Kaiser Aluminum and U.S. Steel. Isold thirty-five systems, I think, to U.S. Steel in Pittsburg, California, formeasurement in steel rolling mills and classifying lines and electrolytictinning lines. In any sheet process, we could measure the weight per unit area,and that correlates to thickness. Well, basically, paper making was a very bigsheet processing industry, and we started out just measuring basis weight andthen ultimately the moisture content.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now you’re still talking about Industrial Nucleonics. Bossen: Yes, they were doing that. I think we came out in 1958 with the onlinemoisture-measuring device. You see, paper is basically wood fiber and water.And a sheet of paper in a reasonable environment will equilibrate tosomething like 6 percent water and 94 percent fiber. And when you’re makingthe paper, before they had these systems that we developed, they had quite abit of variation. You take a sheet of paper coming out of a machine today, andit’s thirty feet wide, and it’s moving at sixty miles an hour, and you can’ttouch it with a sensor. So we developed the systems, initially at IndustrialNucleonics, using analog methods for a control system. And this worked, butnot as well as it could have. So when the minicomputer came along.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: When would that have been. Bossen: That would have been in the mid-sixties to late sixties. The founders atIndustrial Nucleonics, Bert [Wilbert E.] and Roy Chope, were analog peopleand developed vacuum tube circuits and this sort of thing. They weren’t surethe transistor was here to stay, let alone the integrated circuit.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why would they think that. Bossen: People who are brought up in a given technology, and they spend their liveslearning that technology, are not really interested in jumping into a differenttechnology.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. But were you paying attention?. Bossen: Yes. I said to them, “Look, we can use a digital computer, and we caneliminate all of this analog circuitry, and we can use the computer, not only tosupport the measurements, but for the controls and the displays and the rest ofit.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now how could you know that? Was your engineering education sufficient sothat you could understand what was going on in the computer world. Bossen: Yes, sure. I kept up. [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How? By reading. Bossen: Reading, living, looking, learning.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because the development of the computer is a whole thing. Bossen: The computer was developed, the hardware was developed. We developed thesoftware.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: These were the very early days of the application of the computer, right. Bossen: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: In any form. I’m certainly not an expert on computer history, but it seems tome that not that long before that, the computer was almost an experimentaldevice. Bossen: No, that was well accepted in industry. In the sixties, IBM was—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, I thought we were still in the fifties.was when the digital minicomputer came out.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, but when you first arrived at Industrial Nucleonics [in 1951] thecomputer must have been a very new application.. Bossen: Well, it was all analog in those days.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But even so. Bossen: Well, yes, but people had been building analog controls for years and yearsand years before that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All right. A company such as U.S. Steel would be interested in a sensor devicelargely to make sure that its products were consistent. Bossen: To make money!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, yes, but how? [chuckling. Bossen: Okay. Let’s go to the paper industry. Back to that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All right. Bossen: Ninety-four percent fiber/6 percent water. Now the paper, in fact, in the precomputer-control days for the paper industry, standard newsprint weighedthirty-two pounds per ream. That meant thirty-two pounds per three thousandsquare feet. Today about twenty-eight pounds per three thousand square feet isstandard newsprint. Did you know that had changed?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Of course not. And what is the significance. Bossen: All right. Well, do you why it changed? The reason is that it varied so much asit was being manufactured, that some of it was made down here at twentyeight pounds and some of it was made up here at thirty-six pounds per ream.What we did when we had the measurement tools online, and we were able tocontrol both the machine direction and cross direction, we narrowed thatspread down to plus or minus a couple of tenths of a pound. So if it was okayat twenty-eight pounds before, some of it was—whoosh—we’ll just shift it alldown there. You couldn’t do that before because it would have gone too far.So that enabled the paper companies to save—four over thirty-two is eight—12-½ percent of their fiber.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So it was a cost saver as well as a consistency regulator.. Bossen: Of course, of course! And also, you could run the paper machine fasterbecause you didn’t have so much water to evaporate. Paper starts out as aslurry. Coming out of a headbox it may be one half of 1 percent fiber and 99-½ percent water. And then it is drained through a wire, and it gets to be about60 percent fiber. Then it goes into a big string of dryer cans, that may be a cityblock long, that runs over them, and it boils out the rest of the water. So ifyou’re running it lighter, you have less water to evaporate, so you can run itfaster. And that’s how it works in the paper industry. Now in the steelindustry, you get the same kind of situation, and your rolling mill is limited inspeed. So if I can narrow that down and produce it lighter, I can move itfaster. So you’re both saving raw material, and you’re improving yourproductivity.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And that was your sales message. Bossen: Yes, sure! Well, that was the sales thing back at Industrial Nucleonics, wholater changed their name, by the way, to AccuRay Corp. And at Measurex,that’s how we sold our systems. We showed the user—the rolling milloperator, the paper machine operator, ceiling tile operator, what have you—that they could produce a more uniform product, which made their customershappy. And they could save money because they could produce it in the lowerhalf of the tolerance band, and they could run it faster.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now was Industrial Nucleonics selling to these various industries. Bossen: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: To a wide range. Bossen: Not quite as wide as it became. But yes, pretty wide, yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And so you were dealing with all those different industries. Bossen: Customers—yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Which must have been an education in itself. Bossen: Oh sure! <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And you liked that! [chuckling. Bossen: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I suspected. All right. Well, you were at Industrial Nucleonics a long time,weren’t you. Bossen: I was there fifteen years. I ultimately became VP, general manager. And as Isaid, when the minicomputer came along, and I couldn’t get the two foundersto seriously consider it, I left, came out to California, was introduced to someof the venture capital people here.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Before you leave Industrial Nucleonics: the two founders of IndustrialNucleonics were happy with the analog and wouldn’t switch. Bossen: Yes, yes. They didn’t view the minicomputer either as a threat or anopportunity, and it was both, of course.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, and that was really the reason that you left. Bossen: Yes. Besides, I wanted to come back to California. In 1967, when I wasmaking that move, digital minicomputers were just really getting going. Butthere were more people who knew about them in Santa Clara County thanthere were in the whole state of Ohio.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I’ll bet. Well, who were those people and companies? Was it IBM and. Bossen: Yes. One of the co-founders with me of Measurex was a scientist from IBM.His name was Eric Dahlin, and he was a Swede who had come over to thiscountry in the fifties and ultimately went to work for IBM San Jose. He wasworking on computer-control systems with big IBM computers.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That were meant to do what you have been describing. Bossen: Similar things, yes. But they were too big and too complicated and tooexpensive. So when the minicomputer came along, boy, he just dove into thatwith me! [chuckling] He just loved it because he could do what he wanted to. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And at that point he left. Bossen: He left IBM and joined me at Measurex. Another founder was a guy namedGene Anderson. He had been with a small company; I can’t think of theirname, doing a lot of work for Nasa Ames Lab. Eric was the software guy;Gene was the hardware guy. We got together and put together a team. I startedraising the venture capital.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you arrived in California essentially without a job. Bossen: Exactly without a job! [laughter] And I had a wife and four children back inOhio.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you must have been pretty fed up with the founders of IndustrialNucleonics. Bossen: Yes, I was, but beyond that it was more the opportunity that I saw. If theyweren’t going to do it, and I knew we could do this—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now this was before Silicon Valley had a name. But you knew that this wasan innovative region. Bossen: Oh yes, yes. This was well known at the time.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, anybody who was doing the kind of work that you were doing. Bossen: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So that was a magnet. Bossen: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you end up in what is now Silicon Valley? Is that where you landed. Bossen: Yes, Santa Clara.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That’s pretty good.. Bossen: Well, that’s where we put our first office and development center. We openedthe doors on January 19, 1968.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, start back a little bit earlier than that. From the way you’re telling it, orat least the way I’m receiving it, you didn’t even have the idea for Measurexdo you. Bossen: Oh yes. Yes, I did. [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You’re going to do what Industrial Nucleonics was doing using digital. Bossen: And I’m going to use the digital computer. Yes, that’s exactly why I came outhere!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see, okay. Well then, how did you go about it? You get to Santa Clara, andthen what do you do. Bossen: When we opened our doors; we had twelve employees—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But you have to have money first. Bossen: Yes, that’s right. I had raised the venture capital. I raised $1.3 million ofventure capital.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: From whom and why were they interested. Bossen: Well, the first person I talked to, and I was introduced to him by the guy fromChicago at William Blair & Company, Ed Blair, who had been all along themajor investor in Industrial Nucleonics. We got along pretty well. When I left,he gave me a letter of introduction to a number of the people out here, andamong them was Bill Draper, so I met Bill Draper. Their company was SutterHill Capital. Paul Wythes was there. Bill has gone on to other companies andother venture capital.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did they immediately grasp the importance of what you wanted to do. Bossen: Well, the first thing that happened was we liked each other. We looked aroundat companies that they might invest in that I might manage, and we didn’t find any. I said, “Well, maybe we ought to look at doing this,” and I put together abusiness plan for them for Measurex. I remember Bill told me, “Yes, do abusiness plan but keep it to seven pages.” And his reasoning was, he said,“Venture capitalists get many business plans, and they’re fifty, sixty, ahundred pages long, full of projections for twenty years. None of it’smeaningful.” [chuckling] He said, “Now, if I’m going to take something hometo read at night, am I going to take the one that’s seven pages long or the onethat’s this thick? I’ll take the one that’s seven pages as long as it tells thestory.” Well, I did the text in seven, but I did have one more page of aspreadsheet. [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now was venture capital financing a familiar entity to you. Bossen: No, but I learned about it pretty quickly. [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Of course it was the very early days of venture capital as we know it today. Bossen: Yes, I guess it was as we know it today. There had been a number of thembefore—Draper, Gaither & Anderson was one.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Draper, Gaither & Anderson, as I remember it, was founded in 1968. Bossen: Earlier, no earlier. [The correct date is 1959.][End Audio File 1]million, and that was considered a jumbo. That was a big investment! Theykept saying, “Can’t you do it for $50,000?” [chuckling] But now they go outand raise $40-$50 million on a startup. What’s going on here?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, it’s a different world. [technical interruption]So you needed some money, and you met Bill Draper. Bossen: I met Bill Draper and Bill’s partner Paul Wythes, and they decided that theywere gong to back me. But they didn’t have enough to do it themselves inthose days, so they said, “Well, we’re going to help you raise the rest of the 20venture capital.” So they went around with me, Paul Wythes in particular, andvisited with a lot of the other venture capitalists, who ultimately came into thedeal. Reid Dennis was one. His wife actually made an investment herself.In fact, let me digress. We had a party at, I think, the twenty-fifth anniversaryof the founding of Measurex. We had sold it by that time, but we included allof the original investors and the original twelve people. Pete Bancroft was sortof acting as emcee, and he went around and said, “Did any of you keep yourentire Measurex investment until the company was sold?” And the answerwas no, none of them had except one person, and that was Peggy Dennis.[chuckling] I asked her, “Well, why did you keep it? “Well, it was doing well.I didn’t see any reason to change.” So she made something like fifty to one onher original investment because she just kept it and held on! The typical VC,when they get something and it’s going good, they will sell off enough to gettheir nut back and then go on, which probably is the professional thing to do. But anyway, Paul Wythes took me around, and we met, as I said, PeteBancroft, and Pete was the largest original investor. When he came in, thatpretty much guaranteed that ultimately we were going to get enough of the$1.3 million. There was a so-called group of guys—Dan McGanney, BillEdwards, John Bryan—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Pitch Johnson. Bossen: Pitch was not an original investor.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you—pitch him? [chuckling. Bossen: No, we never did. I don’t know why. I think, if my memory serves me right,he was traveling or something in Europe during the time that we were raisingthe fund. I’ve spent a lot of time with Pitch subsequently on various things. Idon’t know if I’ve left anybody out.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, you can think about it. Bossen: So we raised the money.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You raised it easily and quickly. Bossen: Well, in hindsight, I guess you could say that. But at the time, it didn’t seemlike it. We started making the pitch in August of ’67, and we didn’t close on it until January of ’68. So we spent all of that time, and I was flying all over thecountry. It wasn’t just here, see.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Had you saved some money. Bossen: Me?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. What were you living on in this period. Bossen: I had saved $80,000, and that’s what we were living on.I went to Boston, talked to venture capitalists up there, none of whominvested. Or maybe one of them did. But anyway, their view was, “That’sawfully risky, developing that new digital technology,” et cetera, et cetera.“Why don’t you just copy what Industrial Nucleonics did, and gradually youcan get into it?” I said, “No.” So they said it was too risky. The San Franciscoventure capitalists, on the other hand, said, “Gee, this doesn’t seem very farout at all! It’s not a new transistor.” [chuckling] That was the differencebetween the San Francisco VCs and the Boston VCs.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you consider yourself a good interpreter of technology. Bossen: Maybe. [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, Bill Draper and Pete Bancroft don’t have technical backgrounds. Sohow did you explain to them what you want to do with this digital sensorapparatus. Bossen: I had made up a few visual aids. With Pete, I recall when we were havinglunch at his club in New York, I drew on a napkin, putting the computer at thecenter of the network and having it support the sensors and the controls andthe digital displays and all of that together. And he always refers to thefamous napkin. [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: There are so many entrepreneurs that start with a napkin. [chuckling. Bossen: Yes. But you see, I didn’t try to explain the bits and bytes to the VCs. I triedto explain the end result—what we were trying to do, and why this wasimportant to the end user. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was Measurex always going to be focused on paper. Bossen: Well, no, that was only one of the things that we were focusing on. We werefocused on the entire gamut of sheet process industries—plastic film, forexample. Paper was our biggest industry simply because the economics wereso outstanding for the paper companies, and it was such a big market. Therewere, we thought, about five thousand paper machines of adequate size thatcould support the system. And we sold the systems for $150,000 to beginmillion per system.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, maybe first we should get an actual physical building for this company.So where did you start out. Bossen: Santa Clara. We rented the building that was a brand new little spec buildingpeople were putting up down there. It had 13,000 square feet. And we said,“Well, we don’t need that much. All we need is about half that much.” So theguy said, “Okay.” And he said, “ I don’t want any of your stock. I want you topay me in cash.” Big mistake! [chuckling] But anyway, we did, and thenwithin nine months we knew we needed more space, so we took the other halfof the building from him. And we stayed there—the address was 330 MathewStreet. And that was just a little tilt-up building then. We knew— and wewanted to—that we had to move, and we looked around for other space andfound it in Cupertino.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: More space because you needed more space. Bossen: Yes, more space because yes, we sure needed it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Within what time period. Bossen: We bought the space in Cupertino in 1970. We found a beautiful plot. Myformer wife Doris Stephens, who’s now deceased, was our first HR [humanresources] person. She had a doctorate in counseling psych. [chuckling] Sheworked for us for a while, and she found the space.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now this is the woman who had been in LA. Bossen: Yes, whom I met in Poughkeepsie at Vassar. Anyway, she located the space,and it belonged to a nice little old lady, who I suppose has passed away now, by the name of Blanche B. Woelffel. She owned thirty-five acres inCupertino, and she had a factory there that produced tomato paste. She had anevaporator and one big building, and she was growing tomatoes and plums onthis property.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You certainly have a lot of entrepreneurial women in your life. Bossen: [chuckling] Well, she had inherited it from her husband who had just died.She sold it to us, and we paid an exorbitant amount, I thought—$50,000 anacre for the first— I think we had thirteen acres originally.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And you thought you needed that much. Bossen: Well, thought we would.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you were looking ahead. Bossen: So we bought it, and then we started building. We started out, and we built afifty-thousand square-foot office and factory, and then we added fiftythousand, then we added a hundred thousand, then we added another hundredthousand as it went on. But anyway, that’s how we came to be there inCupertino, and then we sold the company to Honeywell in 1997.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, well, don’t go that fast! [chuckling. Bossen: Well, I was just going to mention one thing. They sold off that property for$50 million. [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh my heavens. Bossen: Right after they bought us. I’d have done better had I just bought the land andsat there and done nothing and then sold it! [laughter] That’s why there are somany millionaire developers around.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All right. So we’ve got an edifice, or we’ve now got two edifices—you’vealready outgrown one. What about people? You’ve mentioned thetechnologist/scientist from IBM. Who else came early on? And where werethey coming from, and what were they supposed to do?. Bossen: Oh, well, we hired a lot of physicists. Physicists are necessary in the sensorbusiness. They understand how beta rays and gamma rays interact withmatter. We needed non-contact sensors. We started out with one sensor, abasis-weight sensor or a thickness sensor which I described to you earlier.And then we developed a moisture sensor using infrared radiation.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How would that work. Bossen: Well, infrared radiation was generated from a little light bulb. We shone thatthrough the paper, and infrared radiation at 1.92 microns is strongly absorbedby water, so we built a very good infrared-based moisture sensor. People hadbuilt them before. We were not unique in that, but no one had built a good onebefore, and we built a really good one, thanks to a key physicist that we hadhired whose name is John Howarth. We were still down in the Santa Clara office, and we decided that we needed aphysics technician to help Eric Dahlin with his development. So we advertisedfor one. I’m sitting in my office on a Friday afternoon, late, and Eric comes in,and he said, “Dave, I think you ought to come meet this fellow.” I said, “Thisis the physics technician?” And he said, “Well, he’s a little bit more thanthat.” And it turns out he was an English physicist. I don’t know if youremember, but there was a recession in the defense industries in 1970, and hehad been laid off from Lockheed, and his present job was repainting the papermachine. [chuckling] So he came in, and I talked to him for a few minutes,and Eric said, “I think we ought to hire him.” I said, “Well, it’s up to you. Ifyou want to use him as a technician that’s fine. And we only have a budget forone.” Well, of course, we hired him. Then a month later we had to hiretechnicians for both of them! [chuckling] But that worked out. John made a key invention for us—we patented it and it made all of thedifference in the world, and it was called infinite random scattering. Peoplehad made, as I said, moisture gauges before by shooting infrared radiationthrough it paper and detecting it on the other side. And in order to get a lot ofsignals, say you want to measure a light piece of paper, like tissue paper. Theradiation just zips right through it, and you don’t get enough attenuation to geta decent signal even in that 1.9 micron range. So—his name was JohnHowarth, and John came up with this idea. He said, “Well, why don’t we dothis: we’ll take two diffuse glass plates.” (It looks like ivory glass in color; it’sdiffuse.) “We’ll put one on the top sensor and one under the bottom one. Thenwe’ll shoot the beam up here, and we’ll let it bounce back and forth manytimes, and then we’ll detect it over here. Well, that meant that the beam wentthrough the piece of paper an infinite number of times, so we basically made athin piece of paper look thick. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Would that constitute amplification of the signal. Bossen: Inherently, yes, but of course we had amplifiers on the electronics outside ofthat. So that was a key invention, and nobody had ever thought of that before.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that the first sensor for moisture content. Bossen: Yes. The same physicist came up with another idea, and we made a colorsensor. Paper, plastics, many materials, color is a very important thing. Therewere laboratory color sensors, but there was nothing that was good online. Sohe invented a good online color sensor as well.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Would that work under that same system. Bossen: No. Different principle. You shot straight through for color, and you also usedreflectants for color.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It would work for any color that you wished. Bossen: Any color that you wished. And you defined the color.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: These inventions allowed you to move into different industries, right. Bossen: Oh yes. We did a lot in the plastics industry—any sheet-process industry.Then ultimately we got back into fluid processing by developing some gammaray sensors to measure the liquid density of stuff in a pipe.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now are the radioactive materials still coming from the AEC. Bossen: Yes. Actually, we were buying some— The most useful radioisotope forlightweight sheet materials, like paper and aluminum foil and things like that,is krypton-85. It’s very useful because it emits a very low-energy beta particle.I think we were getting some through the USAEC, but I think we were gettingmore from England. I think they had a thing like our AEC, but they weredoing more to develop some of the isotopes for industrial use. And we gotsome from Canada—oh yes, Chalk River in Canada. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you think the different agencies that were early on in the isotope makingand distribution business deliberately tried to make their products distinctive. Bossen: No, I don’t think so. These were a bunch of scientists and—oh, here’s anisotope. Let’s make it, and maybe somebody will find a use for it. [chuckling]. Bossen: Where are we here?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, you’ve just developed a color sensor. Bossen: Oh, well, we developed many sensors for different purposes. We ultimatelywound up with a dozen or more sensors, but this was after we were going. Ishowed you that annual report. Some of it’s in there. I’ve got other annualreports. Every year they’re showing more products and sensors comingthrough.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Your physicists came up with new products. Bossen: Basically yes. Physicists are the guys who are cranking the stuff out.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And how does that work? Are they saying, “We can make the technology tobe able to sense x, y, z.” Or are you or they saying, “There’s an industry overhere which could use a device that told you x. Can you develop somethingthat will sense the consistency there?. Bossen: Yes, basically both. The physicists would come up and say, “Ooh! We can dothis. Can you use it?” And we would be saying, the marketing people, “Look,I can sell a zillion of these if you can measure this.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So was there a lot of interaction. Bossen: Yes, and we focused that interaction. We would have quarterly meetings andget the physicists together with the sales people.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you think you were unusual in that. Bossen: I think we probably did it more than most companies, but other companies,I’m sure, were doing that. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: This is certainly a far cry from what you’d experienced at Alcoa, isn’t it. Bossen: Oh yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Where you were burdened by the bureaucracy. Bossen: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It seems to make something like this go, you have to have people fromdifferent perspectives dealing with one another. Bossen: Yes, right. Exactly.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: The old system where you had a department for this and a department for that,which you see, for example, in the pharmaceutical industry, wouldn’t workhere. Bossen: Yes. Well, a lot of companies were organized that way and still are. But theydidn’t get very far in developing successful new applications.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was it an exciting place to work. Bossen: Oh yes! Oh, I enjoyed every day. Getting up, driving down 280 to the officeand thinking about the meetings.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was there a typical day. Bossen: We had all of the normal business functions, like quarterly reports and financereports and manufacturing, and then we had the developmental project reports.I don’t think there was a typical day. There’s a typical month but not a typicalday.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, do a typical month. Bossen: I was afraid I shouldn’t have said that. [laughter] <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I just want to get a flavor of what you, David Bossen, were doing on anygiven month. Bossen: Well, depending on the month, I would review the sales and the sales forecastas they were coming together. I would review every development projectmonthly, at least.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Does that mean you’re looking at documents or you’re interviewing thephysicists. Bossen: Both. And let me tell you where I got most of my information from them—inthe cafeteria. We had a very good cafeteria at Measurex, a nice building andgood food, and people stayed in. I’d wait until lunch hour was about a third ofthe way through, and then I’d walk down and see some guys that I wanted totalk to about projects and go over and sit with them. That was sort of likeHewlett-Packard’s management by walking around. I did management byeating! [chuckling] I did a lot of the management by walking around too. Youlearn so much more that way than you do from the formalized reports.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I suspect that you were not an intimidating boss. In some companies, if theboss sat down at the table, people would quake in their boots. Bossen: I tried not to be because I don’t think that’s how you get the best out ofpeople.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, you’re getting at the company’s culture. Could you say a little bit moreabout that? Was there any conscious intent on your part to encourage thedevelopment of a certain type of culture. Bossen: Yes, there was. I wanted an open culture where people would get around andtalk to each other and work, and I wanted bright, intelligent people. I didn’twant drones. Measurex culture was—I won’t say it was unique, but it wasdarn close to it. I’ve had a lot of people tell me that former employees—andthe rest of it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How would you characterize the culture. Bossen: Open, hard-working, results-oriented. In fact, we characterized ourself as theresults company. Our objective was to get superior economic results for our customers so that they could provide superior economic results for ouremployees and shareholders. That was our statement of objective.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was there any place for basic research. Bossen: Why is the grass green kind of research? No.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, maybe not that basic. Bossen: Well, I don’t know what you mean by basic research then.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, you could say to your team of scientists and technologists thateverything they were doing had to have a definite product in mind. Or youcould say, “Go out and read the literature, find out what’s happening, see ifthere’s anything there that we could take and develop into a product.. Bossen: Yes, we did some of that. But it was mainly product oriented. This issomething we want to do—figure out how to do it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, you more or less said that it would come from both sides. Bossen: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Your scientist would say, “We can do this.” And then you or your sales forceor whomever would say well, “There’s an application.” Or you could belooking at the field out there and say, “There’s a need. Can we fill it?. Bossen: That’s right. And we did it industry by industry and we did it within theindustry. Because once we had achieved a foothold in an industry, like paperfor example, the easiest guy to sell to is the one you just sold to, because hebelieves in you. So if we can find more product for the same plants andmills— Well, the other thing that we did that ties in with the resultsphilosophy, we developed—and this differentiated us from our competitors,particularly the old company in Ohio, who we passed in revenue in four years.From a standing start in the industries we were in, we passed them in fouryears. But the key—well, there were a number of keys—was this resultsorientation. [pause] I’m getting worn down.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you need a break? 3. Bossen: Well, no, not a break. Just how much longer do you see us going here?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] Do you want to end sooner rather than later. Bossen: Well, yes! [laughing]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, we’ll wind up. But I do want to find out, were there a bunch ofcompetitors trying to enter into the same sorts of fields. Bossen: Well, there was the company back in Ohio, and they ultimately got onto thedigital computer. Oh, now I remember what I wanted to emphasize: the keydifference that we built was this results orientation and that we built a biginternational service organization. We made more money selling the servicesthan we did the equipment. Ultimately we had about 3,100, 3,200 employees,of which two thousand were in service around the world, from Finland toTasmania.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you have an office in each country. Bossen: No, they would be based in our customers’ plants basically. When we firstsold a [sensor] system in Jyväskylä, Finland, we hired and trained a Finn ortwo to be there as service representatives, resident in the company. And welost money on that with one [system in place]. As soon as they put in a secondsystem, we broke even. When they’d put in a third system, we made a lot ofmoney on the service. But in order to get that, you had to develop the servicebase, and you did that by putting in people with a system. We took losses inthe beginning, not many because we were profitable all along.Our big competitor back in Ohio went the opposite way. They told thecustomers, “Our systems are so reliable you don’t need any service.” Well,total BS! [chuckling] Any computer-based sensor system is going to requireservice, and we decided that we would do that at the customer’s site. Wewould put a service man at that site. If there were two or three customers in alocal town, he might handle that, but by and large they were devoted. Wemade a lot of money off service ultimately, because we got the servicedensity. See, it feeds on each other. When you put your first guy in the site,he’s losing money. Then you get a second system in, and you break even. Youput a third system in, and you’re making a lot of money. You put in a fourthsystem, you’re making a lot of money. And your customer is happy.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Had you that concept as you initiated this service aspect of the company?. Bossen: I knew that we needed to do that, and I saw that opportunity, and we startedout doing that from day one.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, really—day one. Bossen: The first three systems that went in—one went in Varkhaus, Finland. No,that’s the next year. Can you slide that report over to me? [reviewing annualreport] This is the 1972 annual report, and it shows the systems. The first threesystems went in—one in Garden State Paper Company in New Jersey, one inFiberboard Corp. which was in Antioch, California then, one in Simpson LeePaper Company out here in Ripon, California. I wanted to get all three of themin California so we could service them easily. And then we started movingout. Our first European systems went into Ahlstrom and Varkhaus, Finland,Bowater in England, and Fundy Forest Industries in Canada. But this [annualreport] shows the first three—1968, ’69, ’70, ’71, ’72. This was a great sellingaid, showing this to our new customers.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It seems pretty adventurous on your part to be starting a company—starting acompany has its problems right there. But then to take on this service conceptright at the start seems compounding the difficulties. Bossen: It makes it much easier. We couldn’t have done it without the servicebusiness. We would have failed had we not had the local service.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because you would have had disgruntled customers. Bossen: Well, here you are, the owner/operator of a very large paper machine. Andyou’re producing product at the rate of a million dollars a week or, on a verybig machine, a million dollars a day. Once you adopt this philosophy of goingdown in the lower half of the tolerance band, you can’t run your machinewithout the system. We guaranteed 99 percent up time, and that’s not enough.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Really. Bossen: Yes. We got up to 99.7.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Which you could only do by having the service market, right. Bossen: Yes. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I know you want to stop, but I want to introduce two more subjects, all right. Bossen: All right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You mentioned the IPO in 1972, and from the little I know it was verysuccessful. Bossen: Yes, it was. The stock came at $20 and it closed at $40 on the same day.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did that astound you. Bossen: It astounded me that it went up that far. I thought it’d probably get to $25 or$30. But the investment bankers priced it for the benefit of their customers,not for our benefit. [chuckling] It should have been priced at $30, but itwasn’t. But that’s okay. We got there.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What was the stock market doing in the early seventies?when we had our IPO. The market had turned and was on the way up.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is that one reason that you held the public offering at that point. Bossen: Yes. If it hadn’t turned, we would have put it off. We could have raised moremoney from our original investors, because they were very happy with theway things were going.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You didn’t worry about the bookkeeping and public presentation and all ofthat that goes along with an IPO. Bossen: We knew we had to do it. It wasn’t a matter of worrying about it. We had todo it, and we had to get ready to do it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But it can make a very different kind of company when you’re beholden toyour public stockholders.. Bossen: I didn’t feel different about it. I felt that we would go back to our originalresults objective: outstanding economic results for our customers so they willgive us outstanding economic results for our employees and shareholders.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So that was your consistent mantra. Bossen: Yes. All the way.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Everybody in the company understood that. Bossen: Yes, we tried to drill that into everybody. This is the results company.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Some of your competitors were not. Bossen: No, they weren’t! Well, most companies are not when you look at them,really. [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. Bossen: They pay lip service to it but—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Then the last topic: the purchase by Honeywell in 1997, right. Bossen: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why was that. Bossen: Well, there were a number of reasons coming along at that point in time, andthey basically had made an offer to us. I felt that the shareholders wouldaccept the offer.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How did you feel about being bought out. Bossen: Well, I felt that we had had a pretty good run. But I wasn’t happy the way itworked out. What had happened was that the CEO at Honeywell, Mike[Michael R.] Bonsignore, was a pretty good guy, and he basically convincedme that he wanted to use Measurex as the model for Honeywell Industrial. And we would be made the point for all of Honeywell. Well, at the same,almost concurrent with our sale to Honeywell, Honeywell was sold to Allied[Signal] back in New Jersey. And Mike went away to become CEO of thecombined companies, and then they basically had Measurex report tosomebody in Phoenix who didn’t know what the hell he was doing.Bonsignore was out of it because he was now running the combined bigAllied, and I couldn’t get any support there. So had I known that would havehappened, I would not have supported the sale. But I didn’t know that, and Ithought it would work out, and it didn’t. Too bad.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you planning to stay with the company. Bossen: I had agreed to stay with it for three years. But I did not wind up doing what Ithought I would be doing, but I got paid for three more years. [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, should we stop there. Bossen: Fine. Thank you. Well, I offered you ladies to come over to the Circus Club,and we’ll have lunch. 
Interviewer:Mr.  Alafi, let’s start with your grandparents on both sides—who they were, what they did, andwhere they lived. Alafi:Well, first of all, we are Jews from Baghdad. The origin of the Jewish population was taken fromIsrael by the Babylonians and brought as slaves to Babylon. Supposedly they lived there for thelast two thousand six hundred years. People think they might not have intermingled orintermarried. One proof is, their practices—religion, customs—were not diluted. If they didintermingle, they would have been diluted. As a matter of fact, there were Jewish Kurds in thenorth of Iraq who were even more Jewish in terms of customs; they have customs not even todaypracticed elsewhere. For example, today all over the world when people say they eat koshermeat, they take the lung of the sheep after they slaughter it, inflate it, and they see if it deflates. Ifit does, that means it has a hole, which means it has tuberculosis, and then they don’t eat it. Theysell it now to the Muslims, who buy it. For those people in the north, that’s not enough of a test;they even open the brain and see if it has hemorrhage. If it has hemorrhage, they don’t eat iteither. So that’s two tests for their definition of kosher. That’s just an example of evidence theydid not intermarry or intermingle.However, those Jewish Kurds, where now they are fighting [the U.S. war on Iraq was in progressat the time of this interview], a lot of them were fair-haired; some had blue eyes. And they hadbeen like this for generations. People were wondering why, and the best interpretation I’ve everheard is that when the Romans were going through the old Iraqi states, they raped all thesewomen. The children of a Jewish woman are also Jewish, and that might be some of theexplanation.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Interesting. Alafi:Anyway, my grandparents were in Iraq. Some of them were in southern Iran, near Basra, justacross the river. During the Ottoman Empire, they were all under one emperor, even though Iranexisted. My brother [Joseph  Alafi] has one post card; I wish I could get it. He told me there is acity in the southern part of Iran called Abadan, an oil city, and there’s a whole square called Alafi Square. That’s where they lived. Because Jews all over the world historically could notown land, in Europe for example, they always became either traders or professionals.My parents and grandparents were traders in commerce. There are big names in the world, likethe Kadouris in Hong Kong (they own practically all of Hong Kong), who are from Baghdad.The Sassoons in India are from Baghdad. The Hardoons in China all are big names. There is astory about a Hardoon who had a Chinese wife, and they couldn’t have children. But theyadopted eighty children, and then he died before the revolution, sometime between ’45 and ‘49. Iremember hearing from my father [Heskel  Alafi] that after the war, everybody from Baghdad who was any relation, even not related to a Hardoon, went to China to claim the money. As amatter of fact, my father had one partner who was a real Hardoon, and he was there withattorneys and all of this because they tried to get part of the inheritance from the wife, and shewas fighting them. Then the Communists came and the whole thing came to an end. I saw one ofthe Hardoons in New York in ’51 or ’52; he came back from China. So these are their stories.Iraq had about quarter of a million Jews when I left. They were the professionals. They were thephysicians, and they were the merchants, and they were in the import-export business. That’swhat my father did. My father told me when he was a teenager he used to go with his father[Joseph  Alafi] to India, and they would buy merchandise and bring it back. My grandfatherwould go to a factory in India and say, “You have this merchandise; it’s a dollar a yard,” let’ssay. So he wired back and said, “I have a hundred thousand yards for $1.10 [a yard].” He’d tellthose people to ship it, and he got the ten cents. So my father was in the trade since he was ateenager, and he’d go to Bombay with his father to trade. Subsequently, my father was in importexport from England, from Japan, from India, in the textile business.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Always textiles? Alafi:Yes, that’s all he did.My mother’s side was the educated intellectuals. They traveled all over the world. My cousins onthat side were people who read and had newspapers from everywhere. There were Arabianschools, but the Jews always had their own school, because the other schools were not goodenough. I went to a school called Alliance Israelite Universelle, which is a French school,headquartered in Paris. They have schools like this all over the Middle East and northern Africa.That school was great because we learned everything, practically, in French. Seven hours aday—four in the morning and three in the afternoon. We had history, geometry, calculus, solidgeometry, physics, chemistry. You took the exams at the French embassy, the same exams thatare given in Paris, so you could go to a French university.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:This was a high school? Alafi:Yes, high school equivalent.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:What did you speak at home? Alafi:Arabic. But in school we learned Hebrew, French mostly, and English.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:The instructors were French people? Alafi:Eighty percent of them, maybe. They had one English guy. We had a Kurd for Arabic, becausewe had to take an exam in Arabic from the government. If you don’t take it, they take you intothe army. But once you take that exam, they have to take you as an officer. So all the Jews wantto take the government exam too, which was easier than the French, because the governmentdoes not want Jews as officers.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:So you got out of the military that way? Alafi:Yes, but they tried to increase my age in order to take me earlier. It was a mess. They messedwith my passport, but that’s a different thing. It was such a school that the prime ministers senttheir kids there sometimes. And there was an equivalent to it for Jewish girls. The Arab girlsmostly wore head veils. But the educated ones, even the Arabs, didn’t wear veils. The girls atschool also didn’t wear veils. Jews didn’t live in a ghetto, because a lot of quarters were Jewish.But then the middle class and the upper class moved out near the rivers. I was just looking at themaps they’re showing [on television in relation to the war]. We used to live close to the river,and the king’s aunt used to live close by.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:The Jews chose to live together in certain places, but it wasn’t that they were forced to do so? Alafi:Right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:What about assimilation? Alafi:None.My wife [Ginger  Alafi] was asking me about suicide bombers. In Baghdad, they don’t commitsuicide; they kill. And I think that’s why Saddam Hussein—the Arabs are saying they broughtpeople from Sudan and Nigeria and Iran and Syria. Those are the people who commit suicide.And I don’t know why that is.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:For religious reasons? Jihad? Alafi:I did see twice, right in the street, people fighting, and the guy cut the other guy’s throat. Andthen there was one occasion, I was walking near that Rashid Street they’re talking about [on thenews]. I was in my early teens, and there was a man who saw a veiled woman coming downfrom a hotel. He lifted her veil; that was his daughter. It seems she ran away with some guy. Hecut her throat, and then he told all of those people that he avenged his honor, and they allclapped. They took him to jail, maybe gave him a year. So that’s how violent they are there.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Since we’re talking about Baghdad, and the war is going on as we speak, do you want to say aword about how you feel about your former city being attacked? Alafi:The Jews were always persecuted. During the war [World War II], there was coup [in Iraq] thatwas pro-German. They kicked out the king, who was young, and the pro-German governmentcame to power. The Germans came with planes, and the Mufti of Jerusalem was in Berlin. Weused to hear him every day. He would say, “The Germans are going to come, take Israel, andmassacre all of the Jews.” The Jews in Europe were being massacred then, and we knew it.When there was that coup, a pro-German government came, Rashid Ali—I still remember hisname. The government came to all houses and asked, “How many Jewish people are in eachhome?” because the Germans were going to take over and kill them.The British came all the way to Baghdad and encircled the city. They had with them theJordanian army, because the British were in control of Jordan. They brought an army that lookedlike the Iraqis in everything—the way they dressed; the way they talked—and they almostsurrounded Baghdad. The Iraqi army didn’t know who the hell those troops were. Were they theArab people rebelling? So the whole government collapsed, and the government escaped, andthere was a vacuum for two days. In that vacuum, the Arabs went to Jewish homes and startedkilling men, women, and children. Then the people from surrounding poor neighborhoods startedlooting their homes. That saved the Jews, because everybody started looting, all of them.Two or three days later, my father and I went walking. I had never seen in my life heads withoutbodies. They were all Jews that the Arabs had cut up. The pro-German government left when theBritish came in, and the British brought back the monarchy. It lasted until there was a revoltagainst it in ’58 when the king was massacred in one of his palaces. Then there was a series ofmilitary coups, one after the other, and Hussein came in in ’79. So, the Jews were alwayspersecuted. We came home as school children at least once a week bleeding or with a torn shirton. I have relatives who were massacred there. Yet the Arabs themselves really as individuals arefriendly, generous, hospitable, more than any you would think. But then they are raised andtaught to hate. And they are not educated, a lot of them. Hate against Jews, hate certainly againstShiites. They killed a million Muslims. Then against the Kurds, against the Armenians. Nowespecially it’s coming out, with the words “infidel” and “Jihad” that they are building an ideaagain—Islam against anybody that’s not Islamic.We were taught in the schools the following: how did Islam go all the way from Spain to China?Because those people really started pushing Islam with the sword. They were taught when theywere six, seven, eight years old, if you are killed, you go to heaven. So all the non-Muslimsthought that these guys must be insane. You know, they are throwing themselves at the sword.They were scared of them because they were such fanatics. And I remember at that time, weused to laugh—will they really do it? And now they really are doing it. I still remember thesaying, when the Moors were almost being kicked out of Spain after many centuries, one of theirmilitary leaders burned all the ships in Gibraltar, and he said, “The sea is behind you, and theenemy is in front of you, and you have nowhere to go except forward.” And we were taught thatsince we were kids. And that’s what Saddam Hussein is telling his people.We knew about that, and that’s why we went to a French school, and we knew that we wouldleave the country when we finished school. I have relatives who studied in England and in theStates, and I knew I would go to Paris, London, or the States.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Not just the  Alafis, but all the Jews? Alafi:Yes. The Jews have a prayer: “Next year in Jerusalem,” they pray one day they will go back. Butthe ones who were educated always knew they were going to leave.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Tell me something about family life. How many brothers and sisters do you have? Alafi:I had one brother and one sister. But usually the Iraqi Jews have more children—not as many asthe Arabs. The Arabs had six, seven, eight. It was a good life. We used to travel every summer toLebanon—Damascus—and spent a beautiful summer.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Because it was cooler? Alafi:Cooler. Beirut was on the sea; it was warm. But Lebanon in the mountains was really beautiful. Istill find some people from Lebanon and then ask them, “Is it really that beautiful, or am Iremembering wrong?” They say, “No, it was really green.”I used to go to Israel to see my parents, but they died. But then I have other relatives there. I havean uncle who came to the hotel in Tel Aviv when I was there two and a half years ago. He wasninety-one years old and had eight or nine children. He was in tennis shoes and running betterthan I can, and he still didn’t wear glasses. I don’t either. His mother died when she was hundredand eight.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:My heavens. Alafi:My mother died years ago, and my father remarried and had children and grandchildren. When Ivisited my father, he said the following “One day I’m going to go and see my mother.” I thoughthe was saying he was dying. I said, “Why are you talking like this?” He said, “Why, she’s rightthere.” I said, “Where? I thought she is dead.” I assumed she died fifteen, twenty years before.“No, she’s near here in Ramat Gan. You need to see her.” So I went there with my daughter. Alafi:When I wanted to take a photograph of her, she said, “Just a minute.” She buttoned her pulloverand then put on a scarf. Then she said, “Now you can take it.” And I said to myself, “Whatvanity!” I went to Paris, and I had dinner with the wife of a scientist. I told her that story and thatI had said to myself, Quelle vanité. And she said, “Non, quelle dignité.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:That’s wonderful. Alafi:She died when she was a hundred and eight. I told my sister in Canada, “Did you know she isstill alive and a hundred and four?” My sister said, “No, she’s lying. She’s a hundred and two.”[laughter]At one time, before the end of the war, I belonged to the Haganah, the Jewish defense, who werethe underground in Israel before the British left. They used to send people to Baghdad and trainthe young people for self-defense. It was exciting to belong to it. They were training us withguns, and if the Iraqis find a Jew with a gun, they hang you. And they did that to some of myfriends after I left.During the war, a lot of Jews were running away from all over Europe. They wanted to escapeand go to Palestine—Israel. We had them hidden in our home. I remember my father saying,“We’ll all be hanged! What are you doing?”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Was your father in favor of Haganah? Alafi:If he knew, he would have said, “Don’t do it.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:It sounds like a rather dangerous young life.Let me ask one more question about your family, and then we’ll move on. Give me a feeling ofwhat your mother and father’s personalities were like, how close you felt to them, and how muchof an influence they had on you. Alafi:All the family is close; they would do anything for you in the world. They were different. Myfather was a street-smart business guy. My mother was relatively more educated and morerefined. She was the one who was saying go to school. All her relatives traveled all over. So itwas two different worlds. We had both. You have to be able to survive, no matter what, andthat’s what my father had to do. And there is the more—I don’t want to call it spiritual—part oflife. It has beauty, it has art, it has travel, it has education, it has music. We lived in both. Weused to go more to relatives on my mother’s side because it was more exciting. They had more education, more talk about the outside world, and they traveled. While my father was morebusiness.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:How have these two ways of leading one’s life developed in you? Alafi:I knew very early that I wasn’t going to live in that country. I knew very early the whole Frenchhistory and literature. As a matter of fact, when I first went to Paris, it seemed as if I had beenthere all my life. When I came to the States, I understood the culture. Coming to the States wasreally the most impressive thing to me. I thought I’d spend a year or two and then go to Paris.But when I came to the States, I very quickly found that this is a more democratic country—inpersonal relations and what people can openly talk about without hesitation.The first day I arrived in Berkeley, I still was looking for my friends who went there six monthsbefore. I went across Sproul Plaza, and there was a drugstore—I had just come off the plane. Isat at the counter, and I saw the menu, I really didn’t know what this food was.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:You were coming straight-- Alafi:From New York. I had already stayed with my cousin in New York who had left Baghdad whenI was four years old. So I came and saw him. Then I came to Berkeley, and I didn’t know what toorder. This guy was eating something, and the girl said, “Do you want to eat one of those?” Hewas eating a hamburger. And then she brought it, and I started eating it, the same way as he didit. I noticed every time I’d take a bite, he’d look at me. I’d take another bite, and he’d look at me.Then he said, “You must be hungry?” I said, “Yes.” He said, “But you are eating the plate.” Thehamburger was bigger than the paper plate. [laughter] I saw the people here; they are open; theytell you everything there is to know. Because if you ask anybody in Europe any question, eventoday, they won’t open up. They are afraid.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Why is that? Alafi:I really believe it’s fear of anything they might say; they might incriminate themselves or say thewrong thing. I sit on the plane between here and Los Angeles, fifty minutes—yes? This woman’stalking to this woman across the aisle. By the time the plane lands, she’s told her about herdivorce, her children, her grandchildren. It’s unbelievable! You would never hear this in Europeor Japan or the Middle East or anywhere. That is the major, major difference in the culture, andtherefore, you can be yourself here.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:And you saw that right away? Alafi:Quickly.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:How old were you? Alafi:I was eighteen, seventeen.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Oh, very young. Alafi:In Iraq, we were taught all the time that the only thing you could take with you, because you’dbeen persecuted all your life, is whatever you have in your head. So education was extremelyimportant.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Well, let me ask you a question about education. Were you developing interests in school? Alafi:I wasn’t sure; I thought in the beginning to study mechanical engineering. My first course wassurveying. I brought with me a suit tailored by the king’s tailor. He used to be our tailor too. Itwas a double-breasted, pinstriped blue suit. Even my wife remembers it. She hated it. She’s fromBerkeley. I wore it with a white shirt, and in the surveying course they took us up the hill behindthe law school to take measurements. Everybody was looking at me and saying, “Where are yougoing in this suit?” I said, “Nowhere.” All of them were wearing jeans. My father was in textiles.I looked at the material; I said, this is very, very thick—it will last me four years of college—yes?So the next day, I said, “Where do I get blue jeans?” Across from Sproul Hall, there were shops.At that time they all came to here [points below the navel], and I am accustomed to tailoredclothes. I said, “I want something to come higher, to the waist.” So he had to give me bigger andbigger jeans, and I had to fold them. I wore them the next day, then I never wore them again. Iwent to my friends, and I said, “We really should get tailors and have them tailor these bluejeans.” That was ’47, ’48. And I even thought, seriously, Why not make a whole design that fits?Twenty years later they started designer jeans that fit you.Anyway, so that’s when I start taking courses, and I really didn’t have a feel for it. I was gettingD’s, flunking in engineering courses.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Was it a language problem? Alafi:No, I knew English. We had to take an English matriculation exam in Baghdad after the Frenchand pass it. I could have gone to London University with that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Why had you chosen the University of California? Alafi:I and my friends applied to a lot of schools. Of course we had heard of MIT, because I had arelative there, and the University of Chicago, because of Chicago and Al Capone. When I cameto New York, my cousin said, “Where are you going?” I said, “To Boston.” He said, “Are youcrazy? The snow is up to here in the winter.” I said, “Okay, where shall I go?” He really wantedme to stay in New York. He had a daughter; he wanted me to marry her. I said, “No, I’ll go toCalifornia.” UCLA was not as good as Berkeley academically then. So I came to Berkeley. Ireally was going to spend one year and then go to Paris, because I had friends who went to Paris.But in the late forties they said, “Don’t come; it’s a disaster!”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Because of the war? Alafi:’47, yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:The aftermath of the war. Alafi:And then, the more I stayed, the more I saw: this is really the land of milk and honey. Its peopleare decent. I didn’t like the French anyway.Before coming to the States, one summer I said, “I’m going to Lebanon by myself,” and that’sthe first time I left by myself. I was thirteen, fourteen.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:That’s pretty young. Alafi:I arrived in Damascus, and I stood in the center. I went to the hotel and felt all of a sudden solonely, I couldn’t stand it. I checked when did the bus go back, they said, “Not until Thursday.”So, I said, “It’s embarrassing; I told my friends I have gone; even if I die, I’m not going back!”So, I stayed one night in Damascus, then went to Beirut, which I knew. I knew Lebanon becausemy family was there before. I met people in their twenties, thirties, from Iraq. We started goingto dinner and all of that, and I stayed the whole summer there by myself.So when I came to Berkeley, it was a new world really—everything to do was different. Thatwas exciting. It was opening my eyes every day to everything different: the way people think,and also the way all types of people interact. In Berkeley, slowly I had friends who werephysicians, and dentists, and professors, and they didn’t care if I was an undergraduate or not.They take you to their homes and cook and all of that. This is not done in Europe. There was afeeling of respect here for who you are.I noticed another thing. You get dressed in Europe, and you go to a fancy restaurant. Thecarpenter can’t afford it; he doesn’t go. I noticed in Berkeley the physicians, the professors, theworkers, and the students are eating together, and that they can go anywhere they want to. That is so important. You don’t feel it, because you live in it. This is a fact: not England, not France, notany other country has this. Alafi:Looking back, I think it gave me the idea that I was not going to do something because myparents wanted me to, or my cousins, or my neighbors, or whoever is there. I really wasn’t surewhat I was going to do, and it didn’t matter—yes?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Did you feel any pressure from your own father? Alafi:No, never.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:He wanted you to do whatever you wanted? Alafi:Yes. I still remember when I went to visit him in the seventies. I already had started a number ofcompanies, and I was telling him, “I started this company, and that company and—” He keptlooking at me, and he said, “Moshe, just remember you need only this much to eat and sleep, sodon’t kill yourself.” I said, “I am not killing myself; it’s a game. I am telling you so that youunderstand.” So no, I didn’t feel any pressure. We lived very comfortably, beautifully, backhome. But I always knew that you could do more if you were more successful. You could travelmore, if you had a little bit more money. I knew I liked to travel all over the world, so how do Ido it? Become a pilot? [laughter]It was important to do something exciting at the same time, and I knew right from the beginningthat I would not do anything that’s not exciting. I was doing research at the university even as agraduate student, and I enjoyed it, working until four in the morning in the lab, just to see theresults.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Yes, but don’t go so fast, because we’ve left you surveying behind Boalt Hall. [laughs] And youdidn’t like it. Alafi:So I started taking courses after that and trying to think, Do I really want to go to medicalschool? And I started taking courses, not making a commitment towards that. I was takingchemistry, physiology—radiation physiology at Donner Lab.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Crocker Radiation Lab was probably still around, right? Alafi:Yes. What is his name who died from radiation exposure?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Joseph Hamilton. Alafi:Yes. When he died, they found uranium in his lab.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Was it uranium? Alafi:Whatever.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Radium, I think. Alafi:So I took courses there, and I honestly enjoyed doing research. I did high altitude research andwent to White Mountain.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:As an undergraduate? Alafi:After I graduated.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Why did you go into biophysics? Alafi:It was physiology and biophysics—yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Why did you choose those subjects? Alafi:First I thought, Maybe I want to go to medical school. But honestly, inside me I wasn’t sure. Isaw a lot of friends already practicing. Is this how I want to live? So my soul really was not in it.That’s why some courses I just didn’t do well in. I wasn’t willing to sit day and nightmemorizing different things. Then I started doing research in physiology. But in between Istarted having children. My wife started her own elementary school. Really was a very fantasticschool, two hundred kids. They teach them languages, mathematics, French, you know. And ourkids went there. She was very successful. Also my parents were sending money.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:You weren’t making much, were you? Alafi:I started hosiery stores here, just like my cousin. I started a chain of about five, six. I was makingmore money than anybody while I was in graduate school. I even started one in Los Angeles.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Which was a branch? Alafi:No, it was simply my own, but my cousin helped me in the beginning. I really was thinking,Shall I open fifty or a hundred of them? Then slowly I felt, living in Berkeley, that’s not what Iwas going to do. It felt like prostitution, sort of. My father was in that business, and I said I’dnever be in that business.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Why did you feel that way? Alafi:Because the world has more exciting things to do.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:It was the excitement; it seems to be a theme. [laughs]When had you met your wife and married? Alafi:I’d met her in Berkeley. Quickly, people invited me to parties in Berkeley.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Soon after you arrived? Alafi:Almost. Somehow it was just the right group, the bohemians of Berkeley. We knew [Lawrence]Ferlinghetti. We knew all his friends. We used to go Ferlinghetti’s cabin in Big Sur.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:How did you get connected with that group? Alafi:Well, at first we lived on Panoramic. A world-famous professor was there, where I met for thefirst time [Francis] Crick and what’s his name?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:James Watson? Alafi:Yes, Watson, he came to Panoramic in the fifties.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:After the double helix? Alafi:No, before! He wasn’t known then.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:So he was a really young guy? Because he was twenty-three, I think, when he and Crickdiscovered the double helix. Alafi:He had all the professors there. [Roger] Stanier I remember was there. It was Stanier’s home.And a lot of scientists from the East Coast and Denmark. All the Europeans were saying howAmerica is not educated, the culture is more in Europe. Watson told this Danish woman, “Whatthe hell do you have in Denmark, Hans Christian Andersen?” We used to go in later years toCold Spring Harbor for Friday, Saturday, Sunday. Chris, my son, would go there—see, Chris andWatson are good friends, and so I reminded Watson of that night in Berkeley in the fifties.So anyway, we were living on Panoramic and starting to have different friends through theuniversity. And then there were people on Panoramic who lived with [pause], the guy who wrotethe Tropic of Cancer, Tropic of Capricorn [Henry Miller]. One of our friends lived with him inBig Sur. He told me they would drink by noon, each one of them, half of a jug of wine. So thatguy died of cirrhosis of the liver.Then we had other friends on Panoramic who were very good friends of Ferlinghetti. So webecame friends of all of them, and then we would go and stay in Ferlenghetti’s cabin, where allthese people wrote the books in the sixties.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:On the Road, and all those. Alafi:All of them.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Say something about your wife, please. Alafi:I think I saw her at a party. Yes, I did. I was living in a house with some Iraqis, and I invited anAmerican guy, and this guy came with her. I was thinking, How come he could have thisgirlfriend? Why not me?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:[laughs] She was beautiful? Alafi:Yes [with emphasis]. She attracted a lot of people in Berkeley. So one day I said to her, “Whydon’t you come by yourself to dinner?” She said, “Okay.” That started the whole thing.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Is she Iraqi? Alafi:No, she’s American. She was in the psychology department at Berkeley, and she finished as apsychologist. She’s from Kansas. She left when she got her degree at University of Chicago.Then she came to Berkeley.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:You got married very quickly? Alafi:Not right away. We lived together for about a year.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:How old were you by then? Alafi:[pause] Probably twenties, yes. I don’t know if people know who they are or what they are doingwhen they get married.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Well, in your case it seems to have worked. [laughs]. Alafi:Yes, but 50 percent of marriages don’t work.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Yes. Alafi:It is very different to get married to an American woman. That has its own attraction, too.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:And difficulties, I imagine, as well. Alafi:Yes. I think she was more tolerant.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:How were you used to treating women? Alafi:Women are equal, I always thought. As a matter of fact, I thought most of the time they are morethan equal.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:On what basis? Intelligence? Alafi:Yes. I have a number of women CEOs. Some of the time, not CEOs, they can do better thanCEOs in their commitment.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:How did you get that way, considering the culture you came from? Alafi:The first thing was, I was educated in a French school—maybe that. Myself, my sister, mybrother grew up thinking, We are no better than anybody else, but we are not lower than anybodyelse. Even today. We have maids who move around us—I want to go myself and get the glass ofwater.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:You don’t like hierarchy? Alafi:I see so many men that are in high positions, they shouldn’t be there. Women can take morecrap, and yet they can do the jobs better. That means they’re, in my mind, at a higher level thanthe idiots.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Well, it seems to me that you were living in several worlds as a young person. And maybe whenyou do that, you have the advantage of not having to adopt the viewpoint that’s handed down toyou. Alafi:Yes, but I also had to adapt and survive. And to adapt, you see how your environment works.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Mr.  Alafi, last time I don’t think we said much about the high-altitude research you did. Alafi:I was in physiology and radiation physics. I took courses with [John] Gofman and all of thosepeople. And the research we were doing was on high altitude effects, especially on bloodproduction and destruction. The physiology department had labs at White Mountain. They had alab at ten thousand, twelve thousand, and fourteen thousand feet. But we were also doingresearch on mice on campus because we could create a vacuum in a chamber and simulate thehigh altitude and then see what happened to the blood production at high altitude. Whathappened in the pregnancies? Did they abort at a certain point? All of that. So, I did that, and forsome of the work I had to go to White Mountain, put the mice there and compare the results tothose of the lab. That was fun. It was exciting to be awake at four o’clock in the morning and seeresults. While I was in graduate school, I had a chain of hosiery stores, and I was making money.But I felt, maybe because I was living in Berkeley, and my wife had a primary school to theseventh grade. For Berkeley, it was funny to be selling hosiery, you know?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Was she uncomfortable with your doing that? Alafi:No, she knew ultimately I was going to do something else. At that time she opened her school,Twin Pines, for two hundred kids. She made it into something big, and it was good. Our kidswent there. Subsequently, she started a graduate school, Center for Psychological Studies, forpeople who wanted to get their Ph.D.s in clinical psychology. That lasted for at least twentyyears. It was on Solano Avenue, Albany. Then I decided to finish my work at the university. Idid the master’s and the work towards the Ph.D., then I stopped. I felt really two things: I reallywasn’t shaking the world in research. It was fun for me, but I also felt it was selfish, plus I reallystarted feeling encapsulated. I looked all around me, and I didn’t want to be like the academics.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Why did you feel it was selfish? Alafi:Because it was not making enough of a living to support my children. I also thought, I knew myparents had money, so I knew there was a big world; I wanted travel; I wanted to do a lot ofthings. And I didn’t want to be like anybody in Berkeley [at the university]. There was nothingwrong with them; they were great, but I wanted to be part of the outside world, rather than goingto the lab every day and doing research.So I decided to do something, and the way I thought of doing something is, I knew a little bitabout science, and I felt I could do something in the industry, and yet I did not want to work forany company. I think it comes back maybe from my parents. I remember my father once said to me, “If you are good, why the hell do you want to work for anybody?” That’s a dangerousstatement, because you might not be good. [laughs]Anyway, I really was convinced I could start a company, and then I thought, What is thecompany? Physics International has to be about ’61, ’62. I thought of applying radiation tomedicine. And the reason: I was taking courses in the field.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Donner? Alafi:Donner Lab, yes. Some of the courses with Gofman and others. I thought, I have these friends,two of them were working under [Edward] Teller at [Lawrence] Livermore [Laboratories]—yes?And they were really the designers, the designers, of the bombs. They were designing them,testing them in Nevada, and testing them in the Pacific. And they would go whenever they hadtests, you know? So I went to them and said, “Why don’t you get out? And we’ll use yourcapability to apply it to medicine.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Did they have any feeling that working on the bomb wasn’t the best use of their abilities? Alafi:That’s a good point. At that time, the Russians had started Sputnik or whatever. They felt theywere doing something for national defense, and that the country really needed powerful defense.When you work there [at Livermore], that’s what you are creating. You can’t say—likeOppenheimer felt bad later, yes? They were doing something for the country, and the country hasenemies.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Do you remember the names of these people? Alafi:Of course. It was Wally Birnbaum and Chuck Godfrey and Frank Ford.So we started having meetings on weekends. And they started making lists, and the lists were solong and so funny. Physicists did not know about biology, and biologists didn’t know anyphysics, so there was no meeting of the minds. We were trying to make a list of what I knewmaybe should be done, and what they think they could do. So it was a mismatch in a sense. Butwe made lists.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:And the lists were projects? Alafi:Yes. Then I thought, Now I have to go and raise money. But how to raise the money, that wasfunny. At that time, ’62, there wasn’t anything called venture capital. This thing [a chronologicalwall chart of the formation of venture capital firms] was developed by [Franklin] Pitch Johnson. It wasn’t called venture capital; it was called making a living. This is a very important chart, upto 1983.There is Ed Carter and Edward Heller and Ed Pauley. All of those are regents of the university. Iknew the son [Bill] of Ed Carter. Ed Carter was a dyed-in-the-wool Republican—chairman ofBroadway Stores, Neiman-Marcus. When Nixon was running, Carter had each table for dinnerfor ten thousand dollars each. But the son was a Berkeley guy. He used to play his clarinet withTurk Murphy. He’s a photographer. He had a party in the Berkeley hills, and he brought the NewOrleans folk jazz group. I forgot the name, the most famous one. My wife said, “Why don’t yougo; his father’s coming. Ask him about how to start a company.” They had students, and theywere sitting on the floor, smoking marijuana, some of them. I said, “I don’t want to ask him.Carter doesn’t know anything about science.”So I went there, it was hot, and he was standing there shocked: “Who are these people?” Youknow the Berkeley types. I went and I told him the story. I said, “I have three guys; you couldcheck on them. They are from Livermore; they work under Teller. I would like to start acompany with them, and apply radiation to medicine.” He said, “We’re going to have a regents’meeting in an hour. I’ll take you and have you meet Ed Heller, who is also a regent, and tell himthe story.”So he took me in his limousine. I left my jacket, my wife was there, the car was up in the hills.The regents’ meeting was on Oxford. [Clark] Kerr was the president then. Ed Heller was in theroom already, and he closed the door. I said, “This is my story: I am a Jew from Baghdad”—he’sJewish; I didn’t know until later—“I am trying to start a company. I have these people; I knowwe could do something new and different.” I had a list on the back of an envelope. “These arethe different projects we’re going to work on.” He said, “I don’t understand it. How much is itgoing to be?” I had another envelope. I said, “We are going to get six desks. I can get them inBerkeley for twelve dollars each. And twelve chairs, a dollar each. I know where to get them.”My wife had a school, so I knew where to get these things. And he said, “How much do thescientists make?” I said, “I think they are getting twenty-five thousand.” He said, “How much doyou want?” I was a graduate student; I said, “Five hundred.” He said, “Can you live on that?” “Iwill live like a king.” “So how much do you want for the whole project?” I said, “For two years,a hundred and fifty thousand would be enough.” He said, “No.” And I said [to myself], “The sonof a bitch is bargaining!”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:[laughs] Alafi:They told me on the boat, “Don’t bargain with Americans. When you go and buy, that’s it.” Isaid, “What do you mean, ‘No’?” He said, “You need half a million.” I said, “You’ve got adeal!” [laughter]. Ed Carter was standing there. He said, “I want part of it, too.” Then I had to goout because the regents were waiting. I looked in my pocket; I had only one nickel, and it was adime to call. So I went to the gasoline station on the corner of Durant and Fulton. I used to getgas from that guy. I still remember his name was Jim. I said, “Jim, I swear to God, somebody’sgoing to give me half a million dollars. I want to make a phone call. I have one nickel; I needanother nickel to call my wife. He said, “Are you crazy?” [laughs] So I called her and said, “Okay, come and get me.” She said, “What did Heller say?” I said, “They want to give me half amillion!” She said, “Just take it!” [laughter] Then we started Physics International.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:What did they think you were going to do? What did you think you were going to do? Alafi:I was going to start a company for the application of radiation physics, for example. You getisotopes; you build instruments--<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:You weren’t talking about cancer therapy? Alafi:They said to me they could produce electron beams that could really cure cancer. Maybe wecould have competed with Varian. What’s his name, the guy at Stanford who was related tocancer radiation? [Dr. Henry Kaplan] He used to come and bring cells and expose them to ourradiation sources. We started building x-ray tubes that could deliver ten million electron volts, tosimulate the radiation coming from the nuclear bomb. So we spoke about these kinds of things.But we didn’t have specific instruments. I said to Carter and Heller, “We will create somethingout of this company,” and they had faith. I remember I was driving Carter to the airport a fewmonths later, and I said, “Mr. Carter, now I have your money, I am really worried, because it’syour money.” He said, “Don’t worry. First of all, we can write it off. Also we have faith in you.”I said, “I am starting from scratch.” He said, “In a few months, you knew much more than wedo.” So they really were making a bet.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Why did they have such faith in you, a graduate student? Alafi:I think Ed Carter’s son had told him something positive about me. It was the beginning of a newtechnology then. Heller made a lot of money in some company related to science. And I thinkhow I talked convinced them, with a combination of my faith plus those scientists, it was worth abet. Today, you can’t do it. You have to write a business plan and do due diligence. As a matterof fact, a lot of the companies that I started presented one or two pages. I couldn’t do it today.Physics International was the beginning. The physicists [Wallace Birnbaum, Charles Godfrey,and Frank Ford] didn’t know biology. We got consultants but it didn’t work. So it became aphysics and engineering company because that’s all they knew how to do.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Well, I’m not so sure that anybody knew too much about the biological effects of radiation atthat time. Alafi:Yes, Gofman started saying, “It’s bad.” What got him in trouble with the whole university wassaying that any level of radiation was bad. And Teller started saying, “Some little radiation ishelpful.”20<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:They were diametrically opposed viewpoints. Well, Gofman’s still saying that, you know? Alafi:Is he alive, still?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Last I heard. I did an interview with him probably in 1980, and I still get the newsletters that hesends out about no safe threshold of radiation. Alafi:We were thinking maybe of building diagnostics as well. They were building diagnostics for thebombs, to see at what level you’d get radiation injury. I knew then, they were putting soldiers atthe zero-point to decide how much radiation they could tolerate. And they knew it! But Tellersaid at that time, “It doesn’t harm anything.” Then when we started building, the big thing was xray tubes. The military started bringing the guts, electronics, of the Minuteman to test them. Ifit’s exposed to radiation, will it fail? And therefore how to protect it from radiation. So westarted testing the Minuteman. The military had a top-secret facility here in Berkeley. Theywould bring it, we’d expose it, and then they’d change it.While we were doing that, we tried a little bit to develop a coherent radiation—whether it couldbe helpful to some cancers. But it was crude in the beginning.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Coherent means the same wavelength? Alafi:You really make it sharp and go to one point.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:You can focus? Alafi:Yes. Physics International became bigger and bigger, and I started feeling that’s really not what Iwanted to do; you know, it’s physics and engineering. I was executive vice president. I waseffectively running it—yes? And I’d never run a company in my life, except I grew up in thestreets of Baghdad. That’s really what it was.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Who was president? Alafi:Wally Birnbaum. My friend who was a scientist.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Did he know anything about running a company? Alafi:Zero.I’ll tell you a story. I have a friend, Donny Strasbourg, from the Pasteur [Institute]. He has acompany now in Paris. Donny was a child of the Holocaust. He was born in Switzerland andwent to Belgium, but now he lives in France. His wife also has an M.D., Ph.D., and she used tobe in business development for the French company called Rhone Poulenc, I think. And one day,the president caught her in the corridor and said, “Elianne, which business school did you go to?The one in Paris, Oxford, or Harvard?” She said, “You want to know the name of the school?The streets of Antwerp.” Her parents were in the diamond business, and that’s where she learnedbusiness. And that’s also what I believe today. I think you could send people to the best Harvardschool. They get bigger jobs, but I don’t think they all necessarily have a feel for what businessis.I hired once, in Physics International, the first CFO. I remember we were developing proposalsto send to Washington for contracts. We really were just in the beginning. We had five scientists.We were trying to project the indirect overhead—how much paper you need, things that youdon’t know yet. You negotiate a rate, let’s say 100 percent. So if you spend a dollar on directlabor, you are allowed your 100 percent overhead. At the end of the year, they come and see ifyou really spent only ninety cents, so your overhead is ninety. And if you’ve spent hundred—they put a top to it. Hundred and ten, they give you ten more. So, that’s always an estimate.Within 20 percent, sometimes—yes? And then the G&A [general and administrative] also. It’san estimate. And especially with a new company, you really don’t know.So I hired this guy from Harvard. I was so impressed with him because of Harvard. I didn’t go tobusiness school. Wow, I thought, somebody from Harvard working for me. And we werepreparing this overhead. We defined what the direct cost was. I said, “Could you estimate howmuch the overhead and G&A would be?” For a week, he didn’t finish.percent. And G&A, 21.632.” I said, “You are fired.” He said, “Why?” I said, “Idiot, it’s anestimate, it could be within 30 percent! You spent a whole week?” [laughing]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Have you ever had any formal business training? Alafi:None.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:[laughing] You are not a very good advertisement for the business schools of the world. Alafi:As a matter of fact, a lot of them are bullshit. I’ll tell you another story. A big venture group in Boston opened an office in Palo Alto. Thenthey said to me, “When you want to invest in a company, please show it to us in Palo Alto.” So, Ibrought this new guy to them, and I said, “Could you evaluate what he’s saying technically?”The guy at the venture capital firm started asking me, “Tell me about your background, howmany children you have.” I said, “Idiot! It’s not me; it’s him. What does that investmentopportunity have to do with me?” The venture capitalist was doing due diligence. He was right ifI came from Timbuktu. [laughter]Anyway, we started Physics International and started getting contracts from the government.They knew the inside of the Department of Defense, and they knew what they needed. So theyknew what they could develop. So it was successful in that sense.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Is that what you were expecting? Alafi:No, it was to apply radiation to medicine. I left because that’s not what I wanted. It went public,and I made money out of it, and I said that’s really not what I want.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Now, did you bring it public? Alafi:Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:That was your first experience, right? Alafi:Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:How did you learn how to do an IPO? Alafi:We had attorneys from Montgomery Street, and they tell you how to do it. And you say, “Maybenot, maybe yes.” I’m trying to remember: did Physics International go public when I still wasthere, or when I had just left? Anyway, it raised a lot of money.Then I started thinking, What do I do next? Oh, while I was at Physics International, we started asmall SBIC [Small Business Investment Company]. From that SBIC, I started one companycalled Chromatronics, which was building liquid chromatography, with sixty thousand dollars. Ihad to do it in partnership with the investors and founders of Physics International because I wasstill there. It became ultimately successful, but small. Dick Gundelfinger was from Berkeley, allthe technicians were hippies who worked there, and they were fine. But he didn’t want thecompany to grow too big. He designed the first [amino acid] sequencer, a big one, and thetechnology came I think from Australia. And we even showed it in one of these technical shows.But the guy said, “I’m not interested in selling half a million dollars-worth of goods.” He was a small grocery store type. We sold the company to a company on the Peninsula and made a lot ofprofit. Spectra Physics.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:But nothing happened to the sequencer? Alafi:No, we dropped it.I left Physics International after starting at least two or three companies from that SBIC. Andthen I was trying to start other companies. Then I made a partnership with Carter, and I don’tknow who else. And from that partnership, we started Andros and I can’t remember the others.Andros split into Andros and the next one is Novacor. Novacor developed an efficient leftventricle assist device, and it is in about a thousand people.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:What years were you associated with Novacor? Alafi:In the sixties, up to ’78, because then I left and started Biogen--it’s in that range. And Novacor isstill in Oakland. It was sold and resold: the FDA took a long time to approve the device. Thedevice is in nine hundred thousand people in England, and I think now a Canadian companyowns it, and they are pursuing it. We developed it here with Stanford. It was in cows, stayed intwo hundred days, and then was started in people. It never made the big headlines because whenwe sold it to one American company, they moved it to Europe. They had more support of thegovernment to put it in people.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Was it meant to be a permanent implant? Alafi:It started as being temporary. But what happened, you have to wait until you have a replacement,so it started staying there longer, especially when they can’t find a compatible human heart.Slowly they found it could stay three months, and then it was a year, then a year and a half, andso forth. And then they started to make it completely implantable. It is a pump. Usually it’s theleft ventrical that’s sick, so the pump bypasses it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:You probably were working with a cardiac surgeon at Stanford. Alafi:What’s his name? [Dr. Shumway] So, that was the other company. Andros split. They were ingas chromatography, infrared, and they developed monitors that monitor CO2 and NO2 emissionsin your car. That company came also from that partnership that I formed subsequently. So Icould talk about a number of those companies.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Well, I think in the interest of time, we shouldn’t go into great detail on each one of these. Beforewe discuss Cetus, talk a little about the history of venture capital. You were a pioneer in a fieldthat was uniquely American for quite some time, right? Alafi:Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Who else was around and where were they located? Alafi:There was one guy called [Franklin] “Pitch” Johnson. He started with Bill Draper. I don’t thinkthe field was called venture capital then. And, as a matter of fact, we talked, and maybe wewanted to co-invest together.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Where were they located? Alafi:In Palo Alto.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:In context with Stanford University? Alafi:Yes. I was the contact here. Nobody at Stanford would come to Berkeley. There they wereminiaturizing everything, and here they built the cyclotron. They built a big thing. Also, SiliconValley had a history—HP [Hewlett-Packard] and Varian started there. Berkeley, that’s not theirthing. I’m talking about myself, but probably others felt the same thing. I started thinking youcould develop instruments or drugs, even. I realized early that those pharmaceutical companiesand the companies that are doing diagnostic things were coming, a lot of them, from universities.And what do these companies do? They go to universities and hire a professor on their board orsomething. And if they have ideas, they develop them. It’s really a new phenomenon when weventure capitalists said, “Why can’t we hire those professors or give them consulting jobs, andwe develop the drug, and we sell it to the pharmaceutical company?” It was really saying, “Thegiants can’t be all that powerful. You can beat them.” And that’s the idea. Or you could competewith them, because what the hell do they have except they’re a giant?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:And you could sell that idea? Alafi:Yes. And I think it comes, too, with the idea that Americans are gamblers, and Europeans arenot.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Why the difference in culture? Alafi:I am not a psychologist; I am not a sociologist; I don’t know why. But I’ll discuss Europe andthat might give you an idea. If I would have gone to Europe and tried to start something the wayI did here, I wouldn’t be able to enter the door of a company. Even today, if you are notsomebody, they won’t even talk to you. You see what the Americans do: they invite softwareexperts from Delhi and have them work here. The Germans still today are fighting about whetherthey should bring in Indians and give them visas like the Americans? They are afraid they mightstay. They were able to import Turks and Albanians and North Africans to work in the factories.But to get people--<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Well-educated people. Alafi:--to start a company, it’s inconceivable.I’ll give you an example. In Europe, in the eighties, I was introduced to somebody in Hamburgwho was the managing director of Eppendorf. I was referred by somebody from the board of HP,and at that time I had a partnership with Monsanto. I called him and said, “I am a partner ofMonsanto.” So he invited me to his office to have lunch. I said, “Listen, you look at me, I’ll tellyou who I represent.” Then I told him, “I’m a partner with Monsanto, with the board ofMonsanto. I can spend money and start companies in the U.S. and in Europe. So when I tell youI can do it, all you have to do is pick up the phone and check.” I was so impressed with him. Isaid to him, “Why don’t you leave, and you start any company you want. I’ll have Monsantobehind you.” He laughed and said, “Why don’t we finish the food and have a drink, and then I’lltell you—yes? Now that we know each other a little bit, I’ll tell you why. One, if I go hometonight and tell my wife, ‘Honey, we are going to give up the Mercedes and the chauffeur and allof these things. I am to go out and start a company by myself with two more people,’ I think shewould either call the mental hospital or divorce me. Two, if I started and failed, that’s my end.Three, if I go to the bank and want to borrow money, the question is, what’s your collateral?”You come to America in the eighties, they were jumping over each other to start one or the othercompany. The other thing is, when we started Biogen and it was time to go public, we had a bigmeeting in Geneva—we used to have board meetings all over the world. The European scientistswho were dominant on the board said, “No.” And why? They did not want to have their nameson the prospectus, that they were making money. They delayed it at least a year, and we almostmissed going public. Money was dirty although they would kill for it.I’ll give you another example. Oxford Glycosystem is in the news now. The vice president ofMonsanto said to me, “Go and see Dean So-and-So at Oxford.” At that time, Chris was going tograduate school there. I saw somebody like a dean, maybe related to business. And I sat, and he’swearing this tweed jacket with leather here--old British thing. And I started telling him aboutMonsanto, I was telling him about myself, I was telling him about Cetus and how much moneythese companies make. The minute I said that, his eyes changed. He looked at me and said, “Mr. Alafi, we at Oxford are not after money.” I said, “I am sorry.” Later, when Oxford Glycosystemwas going public, Oxford was fighting for every share that they could own and more.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:You didn’t get that response in the United States? Alafi:No.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:There were some people in academia who felt that way. Alafi:You are right—a lot of them. Palo Alto [Stanford University] really started it. But I did not havethe problem of entering any investment bank and saying, “That’s what we need,” especially onceyou had one success. When I went to Europe, you know, if I went the way I dressed, just like astudent, I don’t think they wanted to give me any money. In a restaurant even, I rememberMaxim. Carter’s son got married in Paris. I was in the ceremony. Then they had a dinner atMaxim in Paris. I got there about ten minutes late. The doorman said, “What do you want?” Isay, “I’m eating here.” And he looked me up and down. I said, “Are you looking at my zipper?What are you looking at?” He said, “Do you have a reservation, sir?” I said, “Go down, you’llsee a big table; I am paying for it.” He looked and came back, then he knelt to the floor. It’s notthat bad here.Chris says to me now, “You would be amazed.” My name is known in Europe, because westarted Qiagen, which is a major success in Europe, one of the first venture companies in biotech.The bubble burst in Europe—yes? The Europeans didn’t know what a stock option was. Andthen they started buying stocks and the bubble burst. Now they won’t touch stocks. They give itaway, which is why Germany is in a disaster mode. They bet once, and they lost. AndAmericans, you start a company; even if you lose, you are better the next time, or you getdivorced. It’s better the second time. It’s constant change. Yes, that is the difference.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:But isn’t there also a difference between the East Coast and West Coast? Isn’t there a differentmindset in Silicon Valley than almost anywhere else, particularly in terms of risk tolerance? Alafi:Yes, you’re right, and I don’t know why, yet. I know some of the investors out on the East Coastare just as daring, and they started so many more companies. But in general, it’s a correctstatement. I don’t know where we went in our discussion.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Well, I was asking you about the venture capital climate when you were beginning to foundthese companies. Alafi:It was not called venture capital; it was called just making a living.Pitch Johnson and Bill Draper used to run to existing small companies all over Palo Alto andknock on the doors of all of them and say, “We have money. Can we give you money? Tell uswhat you have.” And that’s how it started.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:[laughs] I believe you. Alafi:Can you believe now, doing it that way? They won’t even answer the phone today.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:So what do you think about doing venture capital in a much more formal way nowadays? Alafi:People will start companies from now until doomsday. They have a formula—and probably it’scorrect—you really have to have the best scientists or the best science. It’s a breakthrough. It’snot a “me too.” I am talking about management. Ideally, you have somebody who’s tried beforeand succeeded. If this is your first company, they invest but with less evaluation or with moretrepidation. It has become big, hundreds of millions. They have to really go into due diligence,legally and all of these things. Some of them have ten partners and they have to all agree. Or atleast a majority of them agree.With the way we do it today, we decide just on two things—management and technology. I juststarted a company in St. Louis with two Muslims from Bosnia. I told them I was Jewish. I reallywas impressed with them. I trusted them. And we started a company. Now people are trying toput ten million in them. They are already profitable after one year, and it’s because they haveideas that everybody says will work, even people from Mallinkrodt. Besides their other products,the idea is to do noninvasively, actually measure blood gases and also different analytes—glucose, et cetera, without doing any puncture. Anyway, I didn’t have any evaluation oranything, I just sat with them and started it. Very few people will do it that way.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Is that your pattern still? The way you do everything? Alafi:Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:And is it just you and Chris? Alafi:Yes. And now we have Karen Hanly. She worked in an investment bank. I really don’t know thescience any more.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:What do you look for when you’re trying to invest? Alafi:The technology—is it real? Can they really do it, at least the first phases? And do I trust them?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:But how can you know whether they can do it? Alafi:Oh, you mean whether the technology works? Oh, that I would check.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:And how do you check? Alafi:I check with people who are authorities in that field. But I don’t have to go to committees and doreports.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:You just get on the telephone? Alafi:Or see them. It depends what it is. I’ll tell you how we started Cetus. I knew Don Glaser for along time. He had his kids coming to our house to swim in our pool. We knew him and his wifevery well. One day he came to me and he said, “Moshe, I have this technology--”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:The microbial screening. Alafi:Yes. “—and I think we could apply it to finding a needle in a haystack.” And then he introducedme to people who came to him, [Ronald] Cape and [Peter] Farley. “See them, and then we canstart a company, okay?” I saw them. They could sell the Brooklyn Bridge; they seemed reallycompetent and confident. But I wouldn’t put a penny in them today.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Why? Alafi:I have to be careful. I’ll give you an example why. Biogen had a major breakthrough in cloningand expressing alpha-interferon. Meanwhile, Don Glaser’s technology at Cetus wasn’t workingthen, while they had a major contract with Schering-Plough, who put seven to eight milliondollars, ten million, in it. And the technology wasn’t working.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:In what way wasn’t it working? Alafi:We had a contract to give them a better microorganism for producing Gentamycin. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer:A kind of antibiotic? Alafi:Yes, Schering’s major one. We had spent about ten million dollars, and our technology—I knewand everybody knew—was not giving them more than 5 or 10 percent improvement.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:It was supposed to increase the production of antibiotic? Alafi:Yes, to double or triple the yield. Then Don Glaser brought in the chairwoman of statistics atBerkeley to look at the statistical results. She said to him, “You might as well flip a coin andyou’d do better in selecting a more productive microorganism.” They did not want to tellSchering. And I said, “I’m going to tell them.” That’s when Don Glaser said, “If you tell them,I’ll sue you.” And that’s when the whole thing ended. I said, “You drop dead. I want to sleep atnight.” And I told Schering. I called them and said, “I own 13 percent of the company. Cetus’technology doesn’t work. Stop the contract.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:And everybody was ready to kill you? Alafi:Oh, yes. But I could sleep at night. But after that I made all kinds of money. It’s not the money. Idid it for my own integrity. After that, the chairman of Schering, no matter what I said, theywould do. As a matter of fact, they invested in Biogen, and they got interferon.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Did you leave Cetus because of this incident? Alafi:Yes, it was a major break.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:It was 1978 when you called Schering-Plough, and then you left Cetus. Alafi:I don’t know if that’s the date.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Well, according to your resume, you were at Cetus from 1972 to 1978. Alafi:Yes, it was 1978, because then Biogen was started.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Oh, so it wasn’t the break over the microbial screening—it was the conflict of interest?30 Alafi:No, no, no. Complete break with the Cetus management and with Don Glaser. And they wantedme out, actually. And they were right. But I couldn’t live with it. How do you?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:You say they were right because you can’t have a company where there is such disagreement atthe top? Alafi:Of course you can’t. And they knew I was going to tell the truth.As a matter of fact, we sold 8 percent of Cetus to Standard Oil of Indiana. And I was at thesenegotiations. I told the board, “The technology is the beginning of something great. I wouldn’tput money in that management.” They said, “Don’t worry, we know how to handle themanagement.” I said, “I don’t care, I’ll sell my shares.” You know? But they didn’t handle them.The management knew, because they used Glaser, and whatever they say, he says, “Yes.” Andsometimes it’s wrong.I’ll give you an example. When Biogen cloned and expressed interferon, how much interferondid you get? Next to nothing. Subsequently, I saw in People magazine a big picture of Glaser,Cape, and Farley with a tube this big, that wide [demonstrates], and saying, “We have interferon,too!” What does this tell Wall Street? That they have it by the tons. That’s what we were dealingwith. As a matter of fact, Cetus didn’t know what to do with PCR. Yes? They didn’t know whatto do with it. They were losing eighty million dollars a year until what’s-his-name got a NobelPrize.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Oh, Kary Mullis. Alafi:I was saying that Americans are gamblers. Actually, when I was still in graduate school, we usedto go to the racetrack, and we used to gamble on horses. We would pick five or six out of eightthe night before. But when we’d go betting, sometimes we’d change our minds at the track.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Would you win? Alafi:We won a lot. As a matter of fact, I think one time Ginger [ Alafi] was pregnant. There was ahorse running at Santa Anita in L.A. I didn’t tell her. I took about three hundred dollars, bought aplane ticket to go and bet, a round-trip plane ticket. So I went there, and I bet on this horse. I stillremember his name, Your Host. That three hundred dollars became by the seventh race threethousand, and I had it in my hand. So I bet it all on that horse, Your Host, because even if itwalks, it would double the three thousand. The horses were walking to the gate. And then I said Ishould wait at the cashier, “Why do I have to wait to cash in a walk?” And I start hearing, “YourHost is first.” And they go about half a mile, and he falls and breaks his leg. And I hear thewhole crowd go, “Oh, wow!” Then I walked out and got a cab. There was a big, fat, old blackman sitting in the cab. He looked at me and called me “Brother” or something. He said, “You look sad.” I said, “I’m not sad; I’m just upset.” He said, “Why?” I gave him the tickets. Hegasped. “Three thousand dollars! I would cut my throat.” I said, “No, don’t worry, I won’t cutmy throat.” I got to the airport, he said, “I don’t want you to pay me.” I said, “Don’t worry.” Sothat is when I stopped gambling.We went to New York one summer, betting. Easterners don’t bet on western jockeys. WillieShoemaker was there. And I used to go every day and come back in New York with two or threethousand dollars in winnings. Then we came back to Berkeley. There was a horse I used to beton in New York who was great. I couldn’t go to bet on him because I had a comparative anatomycourse or something. I said to my friends, “Please go and bet.” Nobody could go. I was givingthem two hundred dollars; I would make maybe three, four hundred. We would hear the resultsin the evening on the radio. And he comes first, he pays ninety-seven dollars, and he would havegotten me nine thousand, seven hundred. And everybody said, “I’m sorry.” So after these twothings I said, “Am I crazy? I’m going to start a company. I’d better bet on people andtechnology.” So I am just showing you, it’s a gambling game—until today it’s a gamble.I have started maybe fifty companies, and gambling every day, deciding if I sell the stocks or notsell, based on the stock price. And which ones? You are gambling when you start a company.They look great. Will they make it? Cape and Farley seemed fantastic. It’s an ideal thing, itseemed. They screwed up the company, really. I wouldn’t start anything with them anymore. Ithink people change too.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:So you think that when you first met Cape and Farley that-- Alafi:They were impressive.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:But did you know enough to really judge? Alafi:Do I know enough what—people? I thought I knew horses.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Yes, I know [laughs]. Well, one could say that you were swept away by your long friendshipwith Don Glaser. Alafi:With Don Glaser—and he’s a Nobel Prize winner—yes?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:But that could be bad, you see. He’s a Nobel Prize winner in physics. Alafi:R-r-ight! But he has his device on bacteria to see if you could pick a mutant. And I asked him,“Does this technology work?” He said to me two things, “You start walking when you are little, and you stumble, then you fall, and ultimately you walk. Sooner or later, the technology shouldwork.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:And that was enough for you? Alafi:Today I wouldn’t do it—I got older. But still I am impressed with what the scientists say. But Iwouldn’t bet—it was enough because—There was another thing. We started Cetus, yes? Thenwe were raising money. I got [Carl] Djerassi, [Joshua] Lederberg, Stan Cohen, and [Alejandro]Zaffaroni. Zaffaroni came and brought a hundred-thousand-dollar check. He said, “No companyends up doing what they think they start doing.” But this was subsequent. That confirmed myfirst impression. Those guys also were betting. So maybe my bet was correct. But I wouldn’t doit today, neither with that management nor with that stake.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:If you had Lederberg and Cohen on the Cetus scientific advisory board, you must have moved onbeyond just the microbial screening by then—no? Why? Alafi:Cape was in Hawaii when Cohen came and said he and [Herbert W.] Boyer had this[recombinant DNA] technology and said you could do it in the kitchen. Because our technologywasn’t working, I said, “We should change to that thing.” Cape came from Hawaii, and I stillremember, Cape said, “No.” “What do you mean?” I asked. Subsequently they came to theirsenses—yes?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Why did Cape say “No”? Alafi:Because already there was the beginning of a split, and maybe because I said it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:But let me get this clear. Cohen and Boyer and the recombinant DNA-- Alafi:When was it?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Well, the first papers were published in 1973. But it took until probably 1974 before anybodyhad the earliest thought of practical application. Alafi:I think it became really more of a reality closer to ’78 or ’77--<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Well, Genentech’s founded in 1976, and it’s founded on the platform of recombinant DNA. Alafi:Then we started already in ’76. Ask Stan. [Eugene] Kleiner and [Thomas] Perkins were myfriends; they were investors in Cetus. I remember when Genentech did the somatostatin. Whatyear was it?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:1977. Alafi:We were working already, but they were working faster. That’s what is the stupidity. Genentechwas more efficient. I don’t know what the hell they were doing at Cetus; Stan will fill you in.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Well, I know Genentech was extremely focused, whereas Cetus was more spread out. Wasn’t it? Alafi:Stan wanted to go onto growth hormone. Cape said to him, “How many dwarves are there in theworld?” Ask Stan. They were more interested in talking big.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:It was too small a market, you’re saying. Alafi:For growth hormone.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:What about insulin? I mean, that was a big market. Alafi:I don’t know what they thought then. I was out already. [ Alafi left the Cetus board in 1978.]Within a year Biogen did interferon, and then Ken Murray did hepatitis vaccine.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:As Swanson tells it, he went to Cetus before he was even thinking of founding Genentech. Alafi:How did he go to Cetus?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:He must have gone because Kleiner and Perkins had already invested in Cetus. Alafi:He was going to do what?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:He wanted Cetus to take on recombinant DNA, and he would direct it. Alafi:That’s not true. Genentech built him up: “He started the whole biotech industry.”You ask Stan. Swanson was employed by Kleiner Perkins. Kleiner Perkins wanted to get rid ofhim. He was the third wheel. Kleiner and Perkins were making all the decisions. Gene [Kleiner]told me. They said they wanted to get rid of him. Swanson wanted to come and work at Cetus.He gave me his resume. And I went to Cape and Farley, and they said, “No.” I don’t know whythey said, “No.” I think they smelled blood.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:What position did Swanson want? Alafi:Anything. He wanted to work with Cetus because he was interested in the new technology.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Recombinant DNA? Alafi:Yes, they refused him. Gene Kleiner said to me, “We gave Swanson fifty or eighty thousanddollars because he went to Boyer and said, ‘Look at what Cetus is saying.’” And Boyer said tohim, “With fifty or eighty thousand, we could do something with recombinant DNA.” And Genesaid, “We wanted to get rid of Swanson.” It was an investment in Genentech. Gene came andapologized to me, saying, “We are invested in Cetus; three or four or five hundred thousanddollars. I swear it’s not me. It’s Tom [Perkins] who did it.” I said, “Gene, you don’t have toapologize. The world is big enough. I would do it too. Don’t worry.” And he said, “So we gavethe investment to Swanson.” This is the truth. Kleiner and Perkins made hundreds of millions onthe Genentech investment, you know.I can’t recall what year Gene Kleiner and Tom Perkins came to me. They said, “People areswapping stock, why don’t we swap half our stock in Cetus with Genentech.” I said, “I would doit tomorrow.” I went to Cape and Farley, and they said, “Oh, we are much better thanGenentech!” and they refused. Two or three of Genentech’s products were stolen from theUniversity of California. The proof is, they lost a lawsuit. With interferon, I saw it with my owneyes—[David] Goeddel in court saying after he saw the papers or something of [Charles]Weissmann, he copied and did his interferon. That’s two products. I think they stole one more.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Well, that suit with UC was about insulin and growth hormone. Alafi:I’m not someone that goes too much into detail. Stan will tell you, and there will be other peoplewho really know it. But I am telling you, the dean of the medical school, my ex-professor,[Leslie] Bennett, said, “Moshe,”—he is really an angel; he said —“how dirty they were, I can’teven believe it or explain it.” That’s Genentech. They were thieves; that’s really what I think.But they won financially.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:They did win. I mean, Genentech is going strong, and where is Cetus? Alafi:Yes. Genentech also did great things by accident or whatever. They really got it, right from thebeginning, fantastic business people, management. The scientists, the German ones—I can’tthink of their names—two of them came to court and testified they stole it for Genentech. Sincethey were part of the patent, one of them made I don’t know how many millions for testifying.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Yes, Peter Seeburg. Alafi:Okay, you know the story.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Yes. Alafi:I knew all those guys. They played dirty. But that’s how the world works.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Perkins, as you know, was on the Genentech board for many years. Alafi:I know. That’s how they started it. Gene told me, he didn’t do it; Tom did it. Now he’s tellingme, “Moshe, I didn’t start a competition with Cetus. We have invested in Cetus. Tom Perkinswanted to do it, and that’s why he’s on the board.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Mr.  Alafi, how did you become associated with Cetus? Alafi:[long pause] At that time I was doing investments individually, in different companies. We werefriends with Don Glaser, and we were friends of the family. His ex-wife and children used tocome and swim in our pool. So we were really good friends. One day he came to me and he saidhe had this technology that was doing thousands and ten thousands of modifications of bacteria,and he was studying evolution, really. And he had a big grant from NIH or something formillions of dollars. He said that technology should work to produce new mutated bacteria,producers of antibiotics for example, and we’d find better, higher producers, using histechnology. That would have implications for production costs, because at that time, when youwere producing antibiotics in bacteria, you had to have these big vats which cost tens of millionsof dollars. So for example if you doubled the yield, you’d cut the cost by half.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:I see. Alafi:I remember I asked him one question. I said, “Do you really think it works?” And he said,“Science always moves, and if it doesn’t work, ultimately it should work.” Then he said he hadmet two guys—I forgot if he said one or two—and that’s Ron Cape and Farley. And I think hemet Cape because at some time he was finishing his Ph.D. in Stanley’s virus lab.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:He did his post-doctoral work at Berkeley. Alafi:Is it postdoctoral? Okay.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Yes. Alafi:So Don said, “Why don’t you meet them and see if we could start a company?” So I met Capeand Farley. Farley was an M.D., but he had gone to business school. He was practicing medicineat night or something. They were looking for things to sell to venture groups. So, I met them, andI was impressed because they really know how to talk. And they are the ones, I really believe itwhen they say, “You can sell the Brooklyn Bridge.” They know how to do it. [laughter] Anyway,they are impressive because they have competence, too. I knew Wall Street people, people atMontgomery. Cape wrote a business plan, and we raised I think two million dollars in a fewdays.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:From whom? Alafi:Investment bankers at Montgomery Street that I knew.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:This is maybe 1970, ‘71? Alafi:That’s the date I have to--<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:The beginning date for Cetus is 1971. It actually incorporated in 1973, but when you read thehistory, they always talk about 1971 being the beginning of the company. Alafi:I remember I put money in at the beginning, and I think I even loaned Farley money to start it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Last time, you talked about founding your first company. Alafi:Physics International.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Yes. You talked about the fact that there wasn’t a venture capital community-- Alafi:Correct.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:By 1970 is there a venture capital community? Alafi:Not really. Here, you see this chart?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Yes, you showed me. Alafi:I was doing things way back—yes? [Approaching chart on office wall]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Since 1960. Alafi:Then Murray Hill—I had this venture group with Carter—yes?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Now, why do they have you cited again? Alafi:Because then here I did it on my own. Then I did other companies. Then I formed a partnership.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Oh, that’s you! Alafi:Yes, Murray Hill [Scientific Investment Company]. With Carter’s son-in-law. And then it endedsomewhere here maybe. [points to year on chart] It’s really at the end of this thing when Cetuswas started.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:You talked about Murray Hill last time, but you didn’t give it a name. Alafi:Yes, I had a limited partnership with Carter’s money, and I started companies with that fund.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:All right. Alafi:Then we [Cetus] went and raised the money really quickly, because at that time I knew a lot ofinvestors. It was not called venture capital, even though that’s what it says there. It was calledmaking a living.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Were these mainly investment banks, where the money came from? Alafi:Yes. From San Francisco, and they brought their partners or friends. And I am trying toremember—they brought an oil company, not Standard Oil of Indiana, another company, in NewYork. And we went and saw the chairman, and they put money in, too--part of that two million, Ithink.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:But in terms of individual contributions, there were just three: Farley, Cape, and you? Alafi:Yes. I was the chairman. Cape was the CEO, and Farley was president.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Now, getting back to Glaser’s technology-- Alafi:And Glaser was a partner—yes?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Did he put money in? Alafi:No.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Did his technology make the mutations, or was it somehow picking out the mutated organismsthat might be more productive? Alafi:No, it mutates by ultraviolet radiation and picks the mutants. That was his idea of looking at hownature does it: you get mutations, and some survive, some die. [tape interruption]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:In this project, we’re trying to get your vision of what’s happening to venture capital, and so Iask: When you collectively went to these investment bankers and tried to sell this microbialscreening device, were they receptive to the idea of investing in technology? Alafi:It really was just the beginning. There were selected groups who began to see that there are otherways to invest than standard investments. I’m trying to remember the name of the oil companythat put money in Cetus. Their money was made in oil. All of a sudden, they started hearing thatyou really can have pharmaceutical products done outside the realm of pharmaceuticalcompanies. That was new!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:And they were interested? Alafi:Yes. But prior to that, there was HP [Hewlett-Packard] already. There were people on thePeninsula who were already in electronics, who were attuned, not the way Silicon Valley istoday, but it was the beginning then, too. So there were bankers who knew about those thingsthat were happening on the Peninsula, and now all of a sudden, we are talking about applyingtechnology to find new drugs or improve drugs. And that was a new idea, because in the oldendays, everything goes from universities: professors are being given honoraria or consulting, andeverything goes to the pharmaceutical companies. That was the beginning of a practically newconcept. And the proof is later, to jump ten years or so. When biotech started doing genestitching, et cetera, the pharmaceutical companies were so threatened. Why? Not because thesesmall companies can threaten them, but what if they can find something with their newtechnology in a very short time that they will take to their competitor? That changed the wholesystem.Venture capital wasn’t as it’s called today. Investors in the beginning were people from theindustry who had money, people who were aware of a technology. It could be in Boston wherePolaroid started, you know. All of these things were hovering. And then all of a sudden camesomething new, biology.40<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Do you consider that Cape and Farley were among the first to realize the commercial potential ofbiology? Alafi:No. It was really Don Glaser. It wasn’t them. They were trying to get any job. They found a newway, a vial I think, to collect blood. They came up with so much crap. It was Glaser whosaid, ”This is my technology. It will do this.” And they were really desperate. They would havetaken anything. I remember they brought me something where you could constantly monitoryour EKG. I said, “How do we do it, and how do we sell it?” Farley brought one thing in hispocket. He showed me. It was a vial. I’m just giving you an example. Glaser said his technologycould mutate and find new mutated bugs that can be higher producers. He said we can do thatwith the pharmaceutical companies.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Do you think you would have gotten involved if Glaser hadn’t been a friend of yours? Alafi:Would I have been involved in starting the company?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Yes. I’m trying to find out how convinced you were that Glaser’s technology was going to be asuccess. Alafi:I had started so many companies, and I really started to say, “This is not the right company,”after starting so many. This is not it because it doesn’t have all the right things—not the righttechnology, not big enough. So I was looking, trying to find what would be something reallyideal. So, when Don said this, it struck me as something big. It was a fantastic gamble. I hadnothing to lose, anyway. The Arabs have a saying, “A penniless man is safe in a caravan.” Ididn’t care if it doesn’t work—yes? And a Nobel Prize guy, I respect him. If he says it works,why shouldn’t it? As a matter of fact, because of his name, quickly we raised the money.But subsequently, Cape and Farley used him, used Lederberg. They would go and makepresentations, and say things that Lederberg used to be ashamed of, because they were makingfalse statements, like we could do this, or we have this. And one day, Carl Djerassi, who was onthe board, came to me. He said, “Moshe, Lederberg is so incensed!” It seems he was at a meetingwith Cape and Farley. I don’t know what they said, what the conversation was. Djerassi said,“They were completely lying.” And I said that immediately to Cape, and he tried to cover up forFarley. And this is true; I know Djerassi right now. As a matter of fact, later he had some of hisfather’s money invested in the company, and when he knew they were playing games, he said ata very early stage, “I want to sell my father’s stock.” So what am I trying to say? They knew howto sell it.So I was trying to find an ideal company. Don Glaser—I thought that is maybe what I wasseeking; maybe that’s the dream. At that time a Nobel Prize was a big thing, and he said it shouldwork.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Is your idea that you want to build a company with wide significance, or do you want to makemoney? Alafi:No, I was making money anyway. No, I wanted something that I really felt was significant, thatnot everybody could do, not a me-too. I could not compete with a me-too. The only thing is toget the right people with—revolutionary is not the right word—ideas, that you could really say,“It was worth it.” All of my investments were like that, as a matter of fact, whether Biogen,Amgen, all of these companies. For example, yesterday the FDA approved Tanox for asthma.Genentech is in it, Tanox, Novartis. I started Tanox, and they made a deal with Genentech.I am trying to show you what I was thinking. I always thought, not run-of-the-mill companies.Of course we did make mistakes, a lot of them. So that was my idea with Glaser’s screener: thiswould revolutionize something that nobody else could do. The proof is we convinced ScheringPlough to put seven, eight, ten million dollars.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Well, talk about that, because you had the connection with Schering-Plough, right? Alafi:Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:How did that all happen? Alafi:I am trying to remember. Cape and Farley started talking to a lot of pharmaceutical companies.They know how to talk, you know? They visited a number of these, and a lot of companies said,“No, we don’t want it.” As a matter of fact, they went to Novo-Nordisk in Denmark and tried tosell them improved ways to produce penicillin. Is it penicillin? Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:I know them as producers of growth hormone. Alafi:Yes, that’s what they are. I went there and saw their production facility was all automated. Andthey said, “No, we don’t need you. We have the most efficient—” I still remember, I said toCape and Farley, “Let’s do it for them free. But for every 5, 10 percent improvement, we get acertain percentage.” And they accepted that. We made an agreement with them, but we werenever able to do anything; it didn’t work. Ultimately, Schering-Plough was producinggentamycin using microspora; it was one of their biggest antibiotics. It was the antibiotic of lastresort. Don Glaser came, and I don’t know if Lederberg was sitting there too, and they made thepresentation. They wouldn’t show them our technology; they wouldn’t let them enter anotherbuilding, because it was secret. It’s all petri dishes. They knew how to say, “Oh, it’s top secret.”And Cetus convinced them, and Schering-Plough started putting millions--maybe seven to tenmillion dollars—yes? We gave them a report, and Farley changed the report. Even though the scientists wrote it, he could play with it. I remember once the president of Schering-Plough said,“I can’t understand that bullshit! What’s he saying?!”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:[laughs] Alafi:And then it came to a point where Don Glaser assembled the chairwoman of statistics. She camefrom UC. I took courses from her. I can’t recall her name. I think she brought another professorwith her. She looked at the data, and she told everybody, “If you flip a coin, you’ll do just asgood as the microbial screener.” I felt so shaken, I honestly couldn’t sleep at night. I said to Don,“I don’t like the idea. I think we should tell Schering.” I remember he said to me, “Moshe, if youtell them, I will sue you.” He’s my friend. “Don, I can’t sleep at night.” So I called the chairman.I told him, “I want to discuss something with you.” He sent the head of research. We had a houseat Tahoe. We went with him and spent the weekend. I owned at that time 12 or 15 percent of thecompany. I said, “This is the fact. This is what the chairwoman of statistics says. I don’t thinkyou should fund us.” He said, “But that’s your company.” I said, “At least I feel good.” Thatreally made a major split.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:I can imagine. Alafi:Djerassi, and I said to Djerassi, “That’s correct.” And that’s when he said he wanted his father’smoney back.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Now, was Cetus based on that technology alone? Alafi:Yes. That technology alone until Stan Cohen came [as a Cetus advisor], within a year or sobefore I left. He said look what he and Boyer did. “You really should give up what you’re doing.And this [recombinant DNA] is the technology of the future.” Cape was in Hawaii. I was withDjerassi, and I said, “Okay, we should give up everything concerning microbial screening andthat’s what we should do now.” Cape came back all of a sudden. I don’t know if he was jealousor something. He said, “No!” But then once he looked at all of it, introducing recombinant DNAtechnology at Cetus became his thing. I didn’t care. I was trying to sleep at night.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:How did Stan sell the technology to you? Alafi:He said to me, “This is a technology that is really effective. This is the technology of the future,and you could do it without a lot of paraphernalia.” We had a whole building for microbialscreening, putting petri dishes, et cetera.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Lederberg knew about recombinant DNA because-- Alafi:Actually, Stan jumped ahead of him. Lederberg should have done that. But Stan was workingwith Boyer.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:You mean, Lederberg should have done it because he was already associated with Cetus? Alafi:No. At Stanford, this whole gene-stitching, whatever you call it, Stan and Boyer did.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Yes. Alafi:Lederberg was the father of genetics. Stan jumped or was lucky—I don’t know. But they bothsaid that’s what we should do. So that was the beginning, okay?The timing I can’t recall. International Nickel—they had a venture fund—came and wanted toput money in Cetus. But we didn’t need money. We already had raised money. So they went andput money in Genentech. And Genentech was funded by Kleiner Perkins. And Kleiner Perkinshad money in Cetus before they started Genentech.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Right. Alafi:And Swanson had the investment book of Cetus, but Kleiner Perkins wanted to kick him out.They didn’t want him anymore because they were making the decisions. So Swanson came tome. He gave me his resumé. He said, “I have looked at the investment book. This is greattechnology. I want to work at Cetus.” I went to Cape and Farley, and they smelled blood. Theyreally got scared. They said, “No, he’s no good.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Now, what do you mean by that? Alafi:They were afraid of him. He looked, you know, thirsty. Instead, he went back to Gene Kleinerand Tom Perkins. Swanson went to Boyer, and Boyer said, “Give me either fifty or eightythousand dollars, and we’ll prove something.” Kleiner Perkins gave him either fifty or eightythousand and kicked Swanson out. But for that, they made hundreds of millions of dollars,because they got a big part of Genentech.When they started Genentech, Gene Kleiner came to me apologizing, really. He said, “Moshe, Iam a friend of yours. We invested in Genentech. I didn’t do it. Tom Perkins did it.” I said,“Gene, I don’t care. Don’t worry.” So, that’s when he started Genentech. And at that time, I hadthe ex-chairman of Schering-Plough, Longman, on the board of Cetus. I told Longman whathappened and what I thought and what I did. And he said, “My God, I didn’t like those guysanyway.” So he resigned from the board of Cetus. Then Genentech said, “We need somebody tohelp us.” I don’t know if they put Longman on the board as a consultant, and he’s the one whonegotiated their contract with Lilly on thyroid or something.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Insulin. Alafi:Insulin.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Insulin and then growth hormone. Alafi:According to Stan, he was trying to get Cetus to start different projects using recombinant DNA,and one of them is growth hormone. And Stan will give you this account. Cape said, “How manydwarves are there in the United States?”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Let’s take ourselves to the mid-1970s. The microbial screening, all of Glaser’s stuff, is beginningto fail. Alafi:But he never admitted it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:The statistician comes in and says, “This technology isn’t doing anything.” Do you think thatthat failure is one reason that Cape and Farley were receptive to taking on recombinant DNA? Alafi:Oh yes, that’s another reason. But somehow they didn’t know what to do with it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Well, who did they have to do it? What scientist came in to do recombinant DNA? Did DavidGelfand come right away? Alafi:No. He came a year or so before I left.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:You left in ’78. Alafi:Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Cape and Farley have been convinced by Cohen and Lederberg to take on recombinant DNA, butthere aren’t that many people in the world at that time who know how to do recombinant DNA. Alafi:Yes, and that’s what was lucky or smart of Genentech. Swanson got, somehow, the best people.He got the Germans.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Ullrich? Alafi:Axel Ullrich, and--<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:[Peter] Seeberg? Alafi:Seeberg. Swanson did that, and we didn’t have anybody similar. You could ask Stan how comehe didn’t convince Cape and Farley to have some of his students or technicians go to Cetus. Theyhired somebody who was working on IL2.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:That early? Alafi:No, subsequently. What I’m saying, they were playing with other things. I remember thestatement of Tom Perkins. “What the hell, they are screwing around, and here we are.” Becauseat the same time, they had this whole monster. They were churning things.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:So the microbial screening was still going on? Alafi:It’s like the emperor has no clothes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:[laughs] How many people were at Cetus at this stage, and who was doing what? Alafi:I can’t tell you. It was all geared to that major project with Schering, and I’m trying to rememberif they had any other project. I can’t recall. And we had a whole separate building.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:The one in Emeryville? Or were they still in Berkeley? Alafi:Berkeley, on Fourth Street.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:That’s where Glaser’s screening apparatus was? Alafi:Yes. And they were making special plasmids, too.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Well, you know, what else is going on in the wider world is the recombinant DNA controversy.Remember? Alafi:And they went to--<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Asilomar. Alafi:Asilomar.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Right. Alafi:And then they had a hold on recombinant research. How long was that hold?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Well, they had to hold certain types of research until the NIH guidelines came out in June, 1976.Not all of recombinant DNA research stops, but the kinds of recombinant DNA research that arebelieved to be potentially dangerous, are put on hold. Alafi:Yes, I remember that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:The other controversy that is combined with all this is the stigma that is attached to academicbiologists going into industry. Alafi:That’s right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:I’m just wondering if Stan, as the co-inventor of recombinant DNA, as one of the spokespeoplefor “this technology is not dangerous,” is a little hesitant to become deeply involved in acorporation. Do you see where I’m going? Alafi:Yes, it’s a good question, but Stan was pushing Cetus to work on projects.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Yes, but he could have left Stanford and joined Cetus. Alafi:He didn’t, and he didn’t want to. None of them wanted to.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Why? Alafi:Because a university position is secure; they could have their cake and eat it too. He didn’t haveto go. They were not that committed. They didn’t really see--nobody saw the breadth of whatrecombinant DNA could be. And you know, he’s a professor. Probably he is thinking that heshould get a Nobel Prize. I don’t know what goes through people’s heads.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Do you remember hearing discussion around the subject of biology professors goingcommercial? Of course, chemists and physicists had been associated with industry forever. Alafi:Yes. I always had trouble with professors saying either they don’t trust business people or theydon’t want to have their names associated with making money. When Biogen was ready to gopublic, the American scientists including--<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:[Walter] Gilbert? Alafi:Gilbert, Phil Sharp, the European ones, Weissmann, et cetera, delayed us. We almost didn’tmake it for at least a year, because they did not want their names to be published there. They hadstarted making money. As a matter of fact, there was a publication, I don’t know where it came,in Nature maybe. A professor in Geneva—I forget his name—wrote, “How can CharlesWeissmann dirty his hands in this company.” And Charles wrote a beautiful article, saying, Yes,they were all afraid. But they were also fighting how many shares would they get, okay?[laughter] Lederberg got involved with different software companies on the Peninsula. Stan—maybe all of these things went through their heads.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Well, let me see what else I have on Cetus. One of my questions was who wrote the businessplan, and you said that was Cape. Alafi:Yes, he wrote it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:And was it a good business plan? Alafi:Yes, very good, impressive. As a matter of fact, when we were trying to go public with Biogen,but Cetus did it earlier and wrote a business plan, they were circulating it around groups all overthe world. And I remember the associates looked at it and said, “My god, who wrote thisbusiness plan? It tells you everything.” Yes, he was good. He and Farley, they sold everything.That doesn’t mean it was true.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Farley was quoted as saying that he was thrown out of many pharmaceutical and chemicalcompanies when he was obviously going to look for corporate deals. Alafi:Correct, to sell them the potential of Cetus’ technology for their antibiotics production.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:What were they throwing out? Were they throwing out the people? Were they throwing out thetechnology? Or were they throwing out the idea that a small company could do anythingworthwhile in pharmaceuticals? Alafi:Okay. I remember the first trip they took to Europe. They were so shocked, nobody would doanything with them. It was the technology, the people.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Now, what was shocking them? Alafi:Nobody would take a bite. Nobody would accept to have any contract or anything with them.They were not buying what they were selling. At that time, they were selling Glaser’stechnology. And nobody believed them. Perhaps that technology seemed like outer space.Actually the Europeans asked, “What does your technology do?” And Cape and Farley said, “Wemutate it, and look for a needle in a haystack.” They kept saying, “And we know how to do it.”And the Europeans said, “How do you do it?” And Cape and Farley wouldn’t show them. Thecompany has Don Glaser in it, so it must have something. Also we have Lederberg on the board,so it must be something. And that’s how it was sold.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:But it didn’t sell. Alafi:Only to Schering. So when they went and tried to sell it to others, somehow nobody else believedit.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Remember, you told me that it is the Americans who are gamblers, who are risk-takers. Alafi:Yes, correct.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:So how much is it what Cape and Farley are trying to sell, and how much is it the climate inEurope, which no matter what Cape and Farley came with, European companies would haverejected? Alafi:Right. I remember I went with them, just out of curiosity, to see how they were selling.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:To Europe? Alafi:No, in the States. And I don’t know if it was the head of research at Merck or Bristol-Meyer.This guy was the most obnoxious guy. Just jokingly he said to Farley, “Okay, you son of a bitch,tell me what tricks you are selling.” So, it’s as if they had been talking to them and selling themthings. And it was embarrassing. He was pooh-poohing everything. It was a technology that theywere not explaining fully what it is. Nobody could give you something today without believingin their technology. They told them they had Lederberg, a Nobel Prize winner. Looking back, Iwouldn’t do anything with them. They were so smart, you know, and so shining, and they hadanswers for everything. And they didn’t have proof that the thing worked. Not one example.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Well, thinking again of Genentech, proof is what Genentech very quickly had. They focused onthe one technology, which was recombinant DNA, and they pushed it to prove the technologyfirst. That’s what that somatostatin work did. Alafi:Yes, that’s what they did.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Here was a competitor right across the bay from Cetus. Weren’t Cape and Farley, and maybe youtoo, watching what Genentech did? Alafi:I had already left. We started Biogen. I left when?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:You left in ’78. Alafi:By that time, I already had had at least a whole year of war with them. Cape and Farley were soconvinced they were better and they were going to find or do the big things. And they didn’thave anybody in terms of business types like Genentech had. They didn’t have the scientists thatGenentech had. They had scientists who worked for Glaser. And Genentech got the people whocould really do things right away. Swanson, really by luck, collected the best available, and 50Cetus were big talkers, yes? Stan was so frustrated with them. He will tell you. Even they had thePCR at last, they didn’t know what to do with it. They screwed it up. They were losing eightymillion dollars a year even then!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:There was this prestigious scientific board, which right away had Lederberg, a Nobel Prizewinner, and Cohen. Djerassi? Alafi:Was on the main board.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:And you of course were chairman of the executive board. How involved was the executiveboard? Alafi:I really was there the whole time, yes? And I was seeing all the bullshit. I told Djerassi that. Theboard was really manipulated. Djerassi is the only one who saw it. Stan Cohen started to see itearly. Lederberg almost didn’t see it, except he was embarrassed by Farley. He was impressedwith Cape. He even put him on some committee or something at the Rockefeller. The executiveboard was not as involved in terms of, “What the hell are you doing now?” Cape and Farleyalways were promising them the next project, and in the next six months, we’ll do better. Theywere not what I would call today an involved board that should have shaken the whole system. Iwas so upset, I had to leave. I had to fight, and people don’t want to fight.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Who was on the executive board? Alafi:Farley, Cape, myself, Djerassi. [pause] Then when we sold some stock to Standard Oil ofIndiana, we got one of them, yes. The attorney maybe was on the board, Julien Stern. I can’trecall the others.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:[Alejandro] Zaffaroni? Alafi:He was not on the board; he was an investor. I remember he came and put in a hundred thousanddollars. It was not the first round; it was the second round.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:His companies were up and running? Alafi:Alza—oh, yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:So Alza came well before Cetus? Alafi:I think so.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:But after Syntex? Alafi:Oh yes, much after Syntex. Zaffaroni and Djerassi worked together in Mexico City, on thecontraceptive pill. Then they came back and Zaffaroni started Alza.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:How unusual was it to have a company founded on a strictly biological basis? Alafi:You mean Cetus?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Yes. But then you’ve got Syntex, which was not working with living organisms-- Alafi:Cetus started as Glaser’s technology application to biology. Djerassi was a chemist.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Right. Alafi:So what’s the question?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:It’s not a good question. What I was trying to figure out is whether Cetus could be called the firstcompany to be biologically based. Alafi:I don’t know if you could say that. Maybe.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:I mean, who else would there be? Alafi:It was unique. That’s why it sounded interesting. Yes, I think it was unique. Oh, there was acompany in Korea or somewhere. Penlab it was called. An American was mutating--<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:That was founded about the same time as Cetus? Alafi:Or before, even. I remember when people started comparing Cetus with Penlab, I said, “Oh, wehave a major thing [the microbial screener], a whole building, and Lederberg.” I rememberJapanese came from Japan, and Don Glaser talked to them, and Cape and Farley talked to them.They wanted to see the machines because they wanted to make a deal with Cetus, and Cape andFarley wouldn’t show it to them. And I still remember Farley kept saying to the Japanese—I stillremember how he acted. He said, “Oh, Dr. Glaser, a Nobel Prize winner.” They asked as to howdid he do it. And they wouldn’t show anything. They wouldn’t let them into the building![laughter] Standard Oil of Indiana put money into all of this, and they wouldn’t show themanything. It was the biggest magician’s tale. I felt, To hell with it! I can do better.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:[laughing] Well, once again we’re wandering through Cetus history. All right, should we talkabout Biogen? Alafi:Fine.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:In 1978, you leave Cetus, and you said it was because you broke with Cape and Farley. Alafi:Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:How did the connection with Biogen happen? Alafi:Inco, International Nickel, wanted to invest in Cetus. We didn’t need any more money so theywent and invested in Genentech, yes? I don’t know when Shaffer called me, and he said, “Wouldyou be involved in a new company? We want to start a company in Europe.” And that was adream for me because I always thought it’s ideal to have a company there, and a company in theStates. I said, “Yes.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Because you like to travel? Alafi:Yes, and I have relatives abroad. Also, I always wanted to see different people, do differentthings. Also, I thought, it’s new for Europe; it’s an American phenomenon; it would be fantastic.And they said, “We will assemble the best scientists and have a meeting in Geneva. We invitethem there.” I think it was at the Richmond Hotel. “And, we will give a presentation, and wewant you to come too, and see if we could convince one or two of those nine.” So they invitedthe nine, really the biggest names, yes? They knew how to prepare a plan, start a company. Theytalked to each one of them, and put their names on a fancy write-up, and brought it, and said,“We will have a meeting.”And they had a meeting, one or two days at the Richmond Hotel, with fancy dinners and drinks. Italked about Cetus. I talked about Genentech. And I said to them, “There are nine of you, andwith two or three, one could make really a major company,” I believed. Then they said, “Okay,we’ll go and discuss it and come back.” I’m cutting the story short. I think Wally Gilbert was thefirst one who said yes, and Phil Sharp said yes. Then all nine of them said yes. I said, “Oh mygod! If perestroika doesn’t work, how is this going to work?” So we sat with Inco and KevinLandry from T Associates in Boston and worked on a plan that each of the scientists gets to jointhe company, gets a number of shares, all equal, yes? Then assign projects—which project doyou want to work on? And each project has a number of shares that comes with it. And based onperformance, they get additional shares.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Where did that system come from? Alafi:We had all the attorneys—everybody sat and came with different pieces. There wasn’t anythinglike this ever before. And then how much stock do you give each one? It was a bargaining thing,you know? They knew what worked at at Cetus. We knew also what happened at Genentech. ButBiogen was different, yes?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Because everybody was spread out across Europe. They weren’t in a company, really. Alafi:Right, it was a virtual company still. Then, there’s the issue: They were all going to work in theirlabs in the beginning, until we found a lab, until we found a president, until we found a place. Sothey assigned projects. For some reason, Charles [Weissmann] got the interferon. Ken Murray—he became Sir Ken Murray in England—did the hepatitis vaccine.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:The choice of these research projects made sense because people had been working on the topic? Alafi:They had been thinking about these projects. Every company had the same list—Genentech,everybody. And then there was EPO[GEN], erythropoietin. We almost had it. Genentech almosthad it. We were really neck and neck.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:So Biogen was working on EPO as well? Alafi:Of course we were. We were working on--<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Hepatitis. Alafi:Yes, and interferon.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:And insulin. Alafi:Yes. Wally was working on insulin. If it works in Dr. So-and-So’s lab, you put money in thatlab. Also you give them money. Because where else would we do it? And all of these are theweaknesses of Biogen, yes? Charles was the one who cloned and expressed interferon onChristmas night. Somebody asked him, “What’s the significance?” Charles is Jewish. He said,“The significance is Jesus was a Jew.” [laughs] And within the first year—maybe I’mexaggerating—first year and a half, Ken Murray delivered the hepatitis B vaccine in Scotland. Sowe did the major thing that started giving them hundred fifty million a year in royalties.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:But remember that [William J.] Rutter’s UCSF lab was working on a hepatitis C vaccine. Alafi:But Biogen must have beat them because they have all the patents. All the hepatitis B vaccineyou get is Biogen, from all over.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Well, Merck-- Alafi:Merck vaccine came from Biogen, I am told. So they have patents. How come? Or licensed it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:I’ve forgotten that part of it. But there certainly was a race for hepatitis B vaccine. Alafi:Oh yes. And for interferon.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:It may be that Biogen’s vaccine superceded the one that Rutter’s group was on the way toproducing, hepatitis C. Alafi:I think so, because I know that Biogen made agreements, and they were getting maybe seventymillion dollars a year from a number of those agreements.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:But I also know that the most lucrative patent held by UC is one related to hepatitis B. Alafi:I don’t know.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:But really it underlines your point: everybody at this early stage was working on the same thing! Alafi:Because, as Charles Weissmannn used to say, “These were the ripe fruits ready to be picked.”That’s why it’s harder now for anybody to cure cancer.So then we started the company, and then we wanted to have a space. Unfortunately, the spacethat was available was in Geneva. Charles Weissmann wanted it in Zurich, close to him. And ifwe had it close to him, I’m sure we would have had EPO and all of these because of the way heworks—from seven in the morning until midnight, even today. We couldn’t find a lab ready inZurich. So they got one in Geneva because they could put people in and hire immediately. Thatupset Charles so badly. We had a meeting in Davis and he said he would quit. So Kevin Landryand I went to his beautiful chalet. We became very close friends. I said, “Charles, you can’t killus [Biogen]. You leave, and everybody can do the same.” He said, “Okay, then I want one thing.I want to be a board member, and you cannot remove me even if you go public.” I said to myself,he doesn’t know that’s a blessing for us. I said, “Okay!” [laughs] We would have begged him todo that, because with his name— He was smart, he had a business head, and all of that. ThenGeneva was started, and we hired people, and we had an attorney from Inco who was withShaeffer, the initiator.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Dan Adams? Alafi:Yes, who really was responsible with Shaeffer to initiate all of that with Inco. It was running in ahalf-assed way, until we got Rob Cawthorne. He was the first CEO, and he came from Pfizer, Ithink. He was in marketing in Europe. He’s very smooth. Ultimately he ran Rhone Poulenc. ButBiogen was something he really never understood. He’s a marketing guy. He knowspharmaceuticals. But this is an R and D company. He really didn’t understand it. Then WallyGilbert got so upset—more and more and more. And that’s when he accepted to take a leave[from Harvard] and to run Biogen.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:How did that work? Alafi:A disaster. Everybody said, “Wally is the smartest, not just a scientist.” You’d discuss anythingwith him, he is smarter than the attorneys, than the accountants, than anybody else. He really issmart. But he also ran the company like a graduate school. We thought somebody who ran to getthe Nobel Prize would be a driver. He was so arrogant in terms of science. All the scientists saythey’re afraid, when he comes to Geneva, to talk to him because he makes them feel like shit.His wife didn’t want to come to Geneva because it’s boring, so she comes and goes to Paris. Sohe goes to Paris. He did not run a company like a company. I am repeating: it’s like a graduateschool.Ultimately we opened a branch in Boston, and that was another disaster because the scientists,the Europeans, were competing on the same project with Boston, and they wouldn’t even sharethe information, yes? That was another mistake that Biogen did. It was not run professionally. Atsome point we said to Wally, “You can’t do it like this.” Actually, he was dumped by the board, and I remember he was so upset. I said, “Wally, you are better off this way. Let somebody comewho can make it. You are still on the board. And you’ll be a hero.” I still remember he said,“Thank you.” And his wife said to him—she never liked all of these scientists, “Come, I havechampagne for you.” And they immediately went with [David] Baltimore in the Pacific on ayacht trip. Ultimately, we looked and looked, and we found Jim Vincent.So, the mistakes that Biogen did: It was not run in the beginning as a company. It was reallymore different scientists in different labs. It didn’t have a coherent concept how to do it, except‘we will do things,’ and ‘we will conquer the world.’ We did not have anybody who understoodthe pharmaceutical companies. Genentech in a sense did almost everything right. And we couldhave been further ahead if we just had a CEO who came from the industry, right from thebeginning. Things would have been much different.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:These scientists at Biogen are at the top of their fields. These are heads of laboratories! Alafi:Oh, yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:The scientists at Genentech are twenty-year-olds! Alafi:Hard workers, coolies.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Yes, and they’re not expecting to run things. They’re just there, doing the science. I wasinterested in whether they were interested in the business aspects of Genentech—very little. Theywere focusing on the science. Alafi:Correct.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:I wonder if that wasn’t one of the problems at Biogen—that the scientists were getting tooinvolved in the business? Well, look at Wally Gilbert. He’s running the company. Where is hisexpertise? Alafi:Oh, you’re right. Common sense. The scientific board actually dominated the main board,because they were in it too. Biogen could have put money in Amgen and got a big part of it. Andthey voted against it, five to four.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Why? Alafi:At one point my friends, the investment bankers, were starting Amgen. And they said, “If Biogenwill put some money, it validates us.” I invited Phil Sharp to Los Angeles, and he saw all hisfriends, and he said, “That’s great.” And I thought the board was going to say, “Yes, we’ll putmoney in.” They shifted. Wally shifted. It was five to four against it, in Paris. They said, “Whyduplicate?” It was arrogance. I was so mad, I said, “Okay, then I’m going to invest in Amgen.”They said, “No, you can’t; you are on the board.” I said, “How about Chris [ Alafi:]?” He wasfifteen, sixteen, and he made more money than I make.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:I was re-reading Weissmann’s paper, “Cloning Interferon and Other Mistakes.”1 He mentionsthat on Christmas Eve his student found that there were measurable amounts of interferon, mindyou, minute amounts. He called you, and you arranged to send an attorney over who gotimmediately on a plane and arrived in Geneva on Christmas Day. Alafi:The attorney that we were dealing with from the East Coast, he just couldn’t get him. He wasskiing in Vermont or somewhere. So I was calling every goddamn thing to reach him. And hegot on the plane and went there.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:This was somebody that you had worked with? Alafi:Somebody that the company had already been working with.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:When you become involved with a company, do you usually suggest who the legal counselmight be? Alafi:No. They already had a legal counsel. I wanted to have legal counsel from here [California], andthey said it doesn’t make sense. So they got a fantastic one on the East Coast, Jim Haley; I stillremember him. I knew a lot of things that were happening. Once I stayed in Geneva for a wholemonth looking at who was doing what, because it was so exciting and important to me. Wedidn’t have a CEO that was pulling everything together. I made a whole list of suggestions ofwhat I thought they were doing wrong. The CEO spent half an hour with me. He said, “I knowall of these things.” I knew, that’s not his meat. That’s not the way to run that company.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Another thing you did for Biogen—remember, Biogen was close to bankruptcy? What did youdo? Alafi:I called the same people at Schering. They know my integrity. I am the one who called them andsaid to them, “Cetus is bullshitting.” So I called the chairman, Bob Luciano, and I said, “Biogenis doing something worthwhile for you to come and see and invest in.” We had a meeting in NewYork with the head of research, and I think the chairman was there too. I think we got eightmillion dollars from them. I don’t know why that number is sticking in my head. For that, theywanted a choice of two or three projects. They will pay for it, and they can take it and sell itworldwide.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Probably one of them was interferon. Alafi:Yes! I don’t know what the other two projects were. Ultimately they dropped it. I don’t know ifEPO was one of them. Then we had to sit and negotiate. I remember that I had Kevin Landryfrom T Associates with us too. And they said, “Okay, eight million.” It’s nothing, you know?They are investing in the company. It’s peanuts—yes? But you have to support the scientists incharge of whatever projects also. We started talking about royalties and discussed it with Kevin,and I remember we said, “We’ll tell them 10 percent.” And we said, “Ten percent,” and Lucianosaid, “Okay.” Immediately I thought, Oh my god, we really sold it too cheap. I said to Kevin,“Let’s talk.” We went outside, and I said, “I think we sold it too cheap. I want to increase it.” Hesaid, “To what?” I said, “Fifteen.” He said, “Are you crazy? They will kill you!” I said, “No,percent is fair.” He said, “Why?” I said, “You’re going to make so much money after that.” Hesaid, “Do you know how many drugs go to one hundred million? Not too many. Let’s make itafter a hundred million you’ll get 15 percent.” I said, “Great!” I thought, this way it looks goodon our I.P.O. But then later, it was selling close to a billion—seven hundred and fifty million—at15. Biogen lived on that royalty, plus the hepatitis thing. I don’t think I would have been able todo it if I hadn’t established honest confidence with them. Also they know how to come and get it.Also it was a new technology. Alafi:Schering wanted to take interferon early in the game. They wouldn’t trust him until he reallydeveloped it. Then they bought DNAX because they wanted to say they have a company inbiotech. I remember when they bought it, we said they bought walking assets. DNAX has neverproduced anything yet, I don’t think.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:I think I told you that I talked briefly with Hugh D’Andrade at Schering. I’m paraphrasing ofcourse, but what he essentially said was, in a sense it didn’t matter that DNAX didn’t produce.Schering wanted to be seen as involved in biotech. Alafi:Correct. They wanted to say that they are in that field.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Is there anything more that you want to say about either of those companies? Alafi:I don’t know. I’ll think about it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Well, why don’t we stop for today.60<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Mr.  Alafi, last time we talked about Cetus and Biogen, and following quickly on Biogen’s heelswas the formation of Amgen in 1980. Can you say how you became associated with thecompany? Alafi:By that time, Biogen had already started; I was on the board. I have a friend, Bill Bowes—he isvery big in San Francisco—who is an investment banker, who I had also on the board of Cetusearlier. He was never happy with Cetus’ management, who weren’t happy with him either. AfterI left Cetus, he stayed on the board for a year or two. He came to me and he said, “I would loveto start a company similar to Biogen.” Then he and somebody else started talking to the group ofscientists associated with Amgen. A lot of them from Caltech, some from UCLA, and maybesome from the East Coast—I can’t recall. And somebody from chemistry in Denver who did alot of the chemistry for Applied Biosystems.Anyway, Bill came to me, and he said, “Biogen has big names. It would be great if we [Amgen]are trying to raise money, and Biogen would invest in it. Then it is validation by major scientists,you know?” And I said, “That’s great.” I remember I had Phil Sharp from MIT fly to LosAngeles. We had a dinner in Santa Monica in one of the Mexican restaurants way up in a hotel.And the prospective scientists from Amgen were there. I can’t recall how many of them. Andthey sat and talked about what they wanted to do, what Biogen is doing, and then later Phil Sharpsaid, “That’s great.”Then we were going to have a board meeting in Paris for Biogen. I convinced at least five of thescientific advisors who really controlled the company then to invest in Amgen. They were on theexecutive board, as well. And they said, outside the board meeting, “Okay, we will invest.”When we came to the meeting, one of them, I think Gilbert, said, “What do we need them for?”[tape interruption]He shifted so now it became five to four against investing. I am convinced we could havegotten—people will quarrel with this number—maybe half of the company for five milliondollars. And now it’s worth sixty, seventy billion! They said, “Why do you want it?” I said, “Iam on the West Coast.” Some of them, the ones who wanted it, said the Amgen scientists are ourpeers, they are great. Some of them said it’s duplication, and why, when we have a hard timeraising money for Biogen, why should we invest in Amgen. I was so upset. Here I was dreamingof another one on the West Coast instead of Geneva. And they voted against it. At that time, thechairman was Robin Nicholson, who came from Inco. He was a scientist, British, and Incoloaned him to Biogen. He was a great scientist, charming guy, the type even if he voteseverything against you, you love him.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:[laughs] Alafi:Ultimately he became Margaret Thatcher’s right-hand science advisor. He sits next to her, yes?And he used to come here, we gave him housing. And they voted against it. I was so mad, I said,“Okay, then I’m going to invest!” And they said, “No, you are on the board.” I said, “How aboutChris’s trust invests?” They said, “Okay.” So I invested almost all, a penny a share. He still has atremendous amount. Then they started Amgen.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Was [George] Rathmann there at that point? Alafi:No. What’s the name of the scientist at UCLA?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:[Winston] Saltzer? Alafi:Saltzer. They were in the process of raising the money, and they raised money already. I can’trecall how much—seed money or something. They gave us stock. I was helping them in terms ofwhat you should do, and what you shouldn’t do. Saltzer used to call me and ask all of thesequestions. At some point, and I can’t recall now the dates, they needed a CEO. I don’t knowthrough whom, Rathmann was flown to San Francisco, and Bill Bowes and I had lunch with himat the Bank of America building. I was so impressed with him. He used to be at Abbott, and heused to work under Jim Vincent, who later ran Biogen. He was so impressive. But of course thisis a different field from diagnostics, but just the beginning. We said, “Here is the offer.” I don’tknow if we wrote it there, but we said, “Okay, we’ll hire you.” Then he went back to Chicago.Then he called and he said no, his wife does not want to move from Chicago. Oh my god! Icalled him. I remember I was in New York on Fifth Avenue in a telephone booth. I said, “ForGod’s sake, fly to Boston. We need a CEO for Biogen, and Wally Gilbert will interview you.”He went a few days later or something, and Wally Gilbert interviewed him. He didn’t like him.He rejected him. Wally is very smart, but he thinks there is nobody as good as he is. He thinksmaybe he’s God. [laughter]So Rathmann went back to Chicago, and soon afterwards he called and he said, “Yes,” he wouldtake the job at Amgen. Then they wrote the business plan, and the plan of Amgen had in itinstrumentation that ultimately became Applied Biosystems, because Lee [Leroy] Hood was inAmgen, so it was his instrument. I don’t know if the sequencer was included or not, but that’s theimplication. Subsequently, Rathmann started it, and instrumentation was dropped. The sameinvestors, or some of the investors, like Bill Bowes, myself, and others, said, “We’ll start acompany for instrumentation.” And that’s how we started Applied Biosystems. The guy fromDomain in Princeton, what’s his name? The venture group? He was in Applied Biosystems.Chris  Alafi:Domain? Alafi:Yes, Domain didn’t come in in Applied Biosystems, and then later he was really upset. He said,“This belongs to Amgen, who are you guys?” So he came in at last and put money in too. Thatwas the beginning of Applied Biosystems. It would have been part of Amgen too, okay? Theother thing is Chiron. What’s his name?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Bill Rutter. Alafi:He was part of the group that Amgen was discussing. When these scientists come in to affiliatewith a company, they give them certain shares. Rutter wanted more because he had recombinantDNA capacity in yeast as well. And Rathmann was begging him: “It doesn’t make sense. Theothers will be jealous or something.” I think Rathmann stayed at his house in San Francisco onenight. Immediately afterwards, Charlie Crocker came and offered him, I can’t recall, either ten ortwenty million dollars, and that was the beginning of Chiron. It would have been also part ofAmgen!So then Amgen made a list of projects. And one of them, indigo, they were going to work on forblue jeans. Every biotech company was hitting on the same list, and EPO was one of them.Biogen, Genentech, and all of them were neck and neck.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:It sounds as though Amgen, at that point, was not aiming to be a biopharmaceutical company. Alafi:It wasn’t clear. I think it was. I might have the list even. Then later they got, because of LeeHood, a sequencing machine. They got into the race for EPO. Charles Weissmann asked me tocall Lee Hood: would he help Biogen? And he said, “These are great people at Biogen; I wouldlove to, but I am working with Amgen.”[tape interruption]At that time, I saw Cetus, those guys really didn’t know what the hell they were doing. Theytalked big, but they didn’t know anything about the industry, about pharmaceuticals. I saw inBiogen how smart people, but they really were not talking like professionals, “What do you do?”For the first time, he talked like somebody from the industry. He said what should be done. Hetalked step by step, and not work on five million things. And, “How much is it going to cost?”“What does it take?” “How long does it take?” “And you have to raise more money.” So hereally had the whole picture already. He studied it, and he knew what he was going to do. Weinterviewed a lot of people, and they talked big, like Cape and Farley talked, “This is a billiondollar industry,” and all of that. This guy, he felt like a captain who knew how to get there. Hetalked to the scientists too, and they all liked him.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:You have to have a firm business sense, but you also have to be able to communicate with thescientists. Alafi:Yes, and that whole industry was new. The scientists had never seen that kind of money. Theycould start companies. So the whole relationship was different. They were not going to work forthe pharmaceutical industry. It was their ideas, and they didn’t want to let go. All of that wasactually done differently in different companies and resulted in different ends. Biogen had themost glamorous, the most fantastic scientists, but it didn’t have the business sense as how tomove that ship. Genentech, by luck or smarts or something, got all the right technical people.Besides their chiefs, they had good Indians. And the business people were great. They came fromthe industry. At Amgen, Rathmann came from the industry so he knew how to bring more andmore industry people later. At Chiron, you have interviewed them. They did very well, but ittook them a long time.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:But the founders, Rutter, Penhoet, and Valenzuela, came from academic science. Alafi:Yes, but they somehow did the right thing, and then they sold half the company to Novartis.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Were you close enough to day-to-day operations of these companies to say something about theculture? Alafi:Well, in Cetus I was the chairman. I was really there every day.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Were you? Alafi:Oh yes! Until I left. I honestly felt it’s a Madison Avenue operation. They really knew how totell the stories. And I started seeing that the stories were not correct. Djerassi had seen it too.And that’s when I decided sooner or later I had to get out and start something else. They reallyknew how to have the right consultants who have names rather than substance. They knew howto do just the right publication, the right statements. Everything is rehearsed. I’ll give one smallexample. The Japanese, when they came to visit, Cetus had pictures all over, “Save the Whales.”And Cape took them down because he didn’t want to insult the Japanese. This is a small thing.Cetus also knew the excitement of the new technology, so they kept touting it, “It’s the newmillenium,” et cetera. Biogen had the scientists. But they didn’t have the knowhow, how totranslate it into a business.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Do you think at Biogen, it was a question of too many chiefs and no Indians? Or not enoughIndians? Alafi:Not enough. And the chiefs were trying to do it in their labs. Later when we started hiringpeople, those people felt castrated by those chiefs too.Genentech was just unbelievable. They copied the idea, but they did it right. I don’t know ifSwanson knew anything about it either. He just happened to get the right two German scientistsand business people. And he was up, going for the jugular. He really knew how to run—okay?Biogen, on the other hand, had all of these chiefs, but there was no one guy who said, “Goddamn it, you do it, and you don’t do this, and you don’t do that.” Until Jim Vincent came, and hechanged the whole culture. He said the scientific board is just a scientific board, not to controlthe destiny of the company. He did that immediately, and he said that before he came. He’s fromAbbott, too. And they are cutthroats in Abbott; you know exactly what are you trying to do,who’s going to do it, what are the results.Instead at Biogen, Gilbert flies from Boston and walks around. The scientists are afraid to talk tohim. They are scared. He makes them feel like hell, they say. And all the other scientists are inand out, and we have meetings in and out. It was like an orphan company. I am amazed that itworked. It worked because Charles and Sir Kenneth Murray from Edinburgh did the interferonand the hepatitis rather quickly. And then we had to wait. We could have closed the company forfive years, until the royalties came up and we didn’t have to spend all that money all these years.Ultimately, it is really management that can make or break the company.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Were you more intimately connected with Cetus than any of the other companies? Alafi:I was there every day.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:But were you at Amgen and Biogen on a daily basis? Alafi:Oh, with Biogen we had board meetings practically every month, every other month. I was goingto Europe in the beginning at least once a month and spending a week. And sometimes I wouldgo and stay two weeks. Intimately, is not like Cetus. I was there; I knew the scientists; I knewCharles. When Schering had problems with them, I knew Schering. They said, “Fly with us,” toconvince Charles to deal with them. People somehow used to listen. But did I have any power tochange things? I didn’t, because there was a board, and there was a scientific board. Then we gotRob Cawthorn, the first president, who was a head of sales or something for Pfizer in Europe.He’s a meticulous gentleman. But he didn’t know a goddamn thing about that industry. I told youonce I stayed in Geneva. He was on vacation for a month. I made pages and pages of what isbeing done, and how should it be done. And then he came, he gave me half an hour and looked atit and said, “Oh, I know all of that.” Then Gilbert came later, and said Cawthorn wants him out,so he kicked him out. And Gilbert ran it, and he ran it like a graduate school. And that’s when wegot Vincent. The whole biotech was an experiment—nobody knew its potential.[tape interruption]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Applied Biosystems, which was founded in 1981, is on the list of companies you founded.[tape interruption] Alafi:That’s before I had the partnership with Monsanto. So it was my investment, not the partnership.As I was telling you, theoretically or in fact, Applied Biosystems was going to be part of Amgen.Then it was dropped because the scientists were not instrumentation people. Someone, whetherLee Hood or the investors, said, “How about the sequencer?” Then we said, “We’ll start acompany.” And that was when we started Applied Biosystems. The whole idea was new.Tommy Davis was a venture capitalist. I knew him very well. We were going to raise either threemillion or five million for Applied Biosystems, and we got most of the money. At the very end,he said, “Just a minute. I want to invest.” And you have to let him, he’s the dean of venturecapital. He called me. He said, “Moshe, this thing, this machine, what does it do? Is it somethingworthwhile?” At that time, we hired Sam Eleter from HP [Hewlett-Packard]. He was makingsixty thousand or something. And I think we gave him—I can’t recall—a month or two monthsor eighty thousand dollars and said make a report and tell us how many of these sequencers ofLee Hood could we sell. After a month, two months, he came with a study. I wish I had thatpiece of paper; I still remember it, handwritten. And in the fifth year, we would sell ninetysequencers. So that’s how much we knew, how much anybody knew. We said, “It can’t be; thereare more than ninety labs.” Also if this doesn’t happen, Lee Hood has more ideas. So we startedthe company anyway.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:You’re talking of course about an automatic sequencer. Did any other company have such aproduct? Alafi:Yes. We started a company in Berkeley called Chromatronics. Liquid chromatography, yes?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:It’s here on your CV: Chromatronics, Incorporated, Berkeley, California. 1968. Alafi:One guy from Berkeley, hippie, his name is Gundlefinger. He had all the hippies in Berkeleywork for him. And Pitch Johnson became an investor too. That company grew very well andeven HP was using them. Then there was an Australian scientist who has developed thissequencer. And we built one. And we put it in a show. When did Chromatronics start—in ‘68?So it must have been in the seventies sometime. And I think Beckman also had something therein the show. And then it was going to be in the hundreds of thousands. And I still rememberChromatronics on Fourth Street, Berkeley. The CEO said, “I don’t need to get into the cost ofinstrument wars. I don’t want to do it.” Another scientist later was suing or saying Lee Hoodcopied it from him. So that’s as much as I know.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Tell me about Qiagen, another company you founded. Alafi:I said I would meet with one of Charles Weissmann’s postdocs. I met him and another guy[Metin Coltan? and Karstem Henco?] at the airport in Frankfurt. I was so impressed with them. Isaid to myself, even if the concept didn’t work, these scientists are smart enough to know how tochange direction. And they raised the money, and they almost lost all the money. They were ableto raise a little bit more from the insiders. But the banks are tough in Germany; they don’t giveyou money. When they wanted to raise more money, the board—I wasn’t on the board—hadthem go to the bank, and put their homes as collateral before they would give them money. Noscientists in the U.S. will ever accept that. But ultimately, they really developed somethingsubstantial. Enter any lab, you see Qiagen products for DNA purification.[tape interruption]They were two young people; they had never run a company. I would start anything with them.That’s how good they were without being from a business school like Harvard or Stanford.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Oxford GlycoSciences? Alafi:Monsanto was interested because they were funding Raymond Dwerk, who was in glycobiologyat Oxford. Through his technology, Howard Schneiderman said, “Why don’t you start acompany with Oxford technology?” I went and started a company with a British venture capitalfirm. Over the years, they built sequencers for sugar, carbohydrates. But it never took off. Thenthey changed and went into developing drugs, and Kirk Raab from Genentech took over as CEO.They thought it could be just as big in supporting sequencing. It didn’t materialize. Then theychanged direction, and now, I think, they are into a couple of drugs. And, as you read, they are inthe process of being merged.My idea was to start different companies all over, and ultimately they can help each other. Itdidn’t work out that way.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Never? Alafi:It’s different countries, different cultures. I thought it would be like a symbiotic relationship, butit’s not easy.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Stereotaxis? Alafi:That’s the one company where Chris is on the board. It’s in St. Louis. It was started as a seedinvestment by a venture firm called Sanderling. We had money in that firm too, as investors.They started with a small amount of money in developing the concept and the technology in theirfirm in Sand Hill Road. They spent the first amount of money—I don’t remember—in maybe ayear. Then they wanted to start a real company, and then we came into it. And now, I’ll tell you what it is. If you think of an MRI machine: you lie down in it, this has magnet all around you,and then they use a catheter, controlled from a computer that has a magnetic tip. So before, thephysician had to wear a thirty-pound lead apron. The patients have limited space to be radiated.After a certain age they have to stop. Well, using the Stereotaxis machine, the physician can sitin New York and control it and go within a fraction of a millimeter anywhere, in the brain, in theheart, et cetera. They are selling twenty of them this year at a million each. Forty next year. AndSiemens, who just put a lot of money in it, and now Phillips and G.E. are hovering around; theywant to be part of the deal. And I am sure the company will be worth a billion in two years.Everybody--cardiologists, a lot of hospitals--are beginning to want it. That’s what’s exciting:You go to these meetings, and they have developed something else, something more exciting.It’s the best movie house in the world. And they make money too on the side.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Would you like to talk about disasters? Alafi:Yes. The one that was in competition with Intel. It was called Qualydine. Invitron—that wouldhave been a major one—is a failure. We started a small company, we really didn’t know muchabout it, it was in the laser, some small shop in Arizona. We didn’t know much about thetechnology nor the people. Through some people, we invested. It was not intelligently invested--not the right people, not the right company. That’s another one. [pause] There were a number ofthose companies that really never got off the ground. We started them, we put money in them,and it wasn’t worth it to really go any further, so we stopped them. But not too many.As I was telling you, we have money in different funds. They invest. Over these funds, we investin fifty companies. So ultimately, they either sell these companies or go public. Then we getstock from those companies. So we have to worry and watch these companies too.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:It sounds like a lot for two people. Alafi:A lot, yes. But when we put money in some venture funds we know, we have faith in them. Weconcentrate on the ones we have major, major investments in. And the others, there are peoplewho are on the board too. The Indians sometimes have eleven, twelve, fifteen children. Thereason is some of them die, and they need the rest to survive.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:So you translate that into business strategy? Alafi:No, but each time, you think that this is a healthy company. And most of them are.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Well, I think we’re coming to the end. Do you want to make some general observations? Youstarted on this track well before there was an organized venture capital industry. How much doyou think your approach has been modified, if at all, by the new way of investing? Alafi:[pause] First of all, we didn’t know what we were trying to do. I showed you this [wall chartchronology]. Pitch Johnson was trying to make a living. But then it developed into, it’s excitingto see these new technologies and to start companies. It wasn’t expensive at the beginning. Andto think one day you’ll make more than your salary. But we never thought, nobody ever thoughtat that time, of companies worth tens or hundreds of millions. No, that’s insanity. We didn’tcome to investing with the idea of big firms, organizations—you put this much money in, rate ofreturn, and this is how you do it. It was really over time, from the hip pocket. It was my thing,and the same thing with Gene Kleiner in the beginning: it was bet on a horse, bet on technology,that we felt worthwhile. But you have to work at it, the people have to work at it, and grow it,and ultimately you make a living. Then slowly, slowly, technology started having more and morepremiums. The premium used to be gotten by the pharmaceutical companies. Now it’s a newfield; small people can do things.The other thing is how venture capital changed. I’ll give you an example. I already had startedmaybe twenty, thirty companies. Then I had a group in the East Coast, they started a fund here inPalo Alto, and they sent a young guy to start companies. One day I took some guy with me; Iwas interested in starting a company with him. The guy at the investment firm started asking mewhere was I born, where was I raised, and what my education was in relation to this guy. I said,“You are not going to invest in me. This is the guy, talk to him about his idea.” But he had abook, how to negotiate? I didn’t care! I invested in somebody from China, you know?Venture capital has become institutionalized. They have meetings, five of them or ten of them sitevery Monday and all of them, I think, have to approve an investment. So it becomes maybemore sure, but still there are failures. They could say, “I didn’t do it myself; you all did it withme.” Yes? Venture capital became bigger, the money is bigger. It became you really have tothink when you go public, how much, how are you going— Well, I never thought of any of thesethings when I started Cetus or this one or that one. I just thought, It’s exciting; it will work. So,there aren’t too many who deal anywhere the way we used to do. I really come from a differentculture. I still think the same way. The word is gambling, whether you believe it or not. Youcould study at Harvard; you could study it anywhere. If the professors really knew, each one ofthem would become a billionaire, and the billionaires are not from there [the universities]. If theyare from there, they were the accountants who cheated, from Harvard and Stanford.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:[laughs] Alafi:So, it is not as easy today. I cannot go today, for example, even with my friends. They will bet ifI want to invest in something, like with these Muslims. And now they put in seven and a halfmillion. But they went back and forth, and due diligence and attorneys and consultants andneurologists and everything! These Muslims said, “My God, you just gave us the money, andthese guys are driving us crazy!” And they interviewed them back and forth and gave medifferent projections. I am glad they are there now, because it’s going to be bigger. Let themworry. So that’s how it’s done. You could do all of that, and it could be a disaster.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:So, when you want to co-invest with one of these venture capital firms, can you, Moshe  Alafi,say, “Well, look at my track record. I don’t have to do things the way you do. Just look at whatI’ve done.” Alafi:If I bring somebody with me, some new company?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Yes. Alafi:They will investigate it. I just put a lot of money in a new company, and now it needs moremoney. So they go investigate it for months before they decide to put in money.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:I was thinking of your own credibility. They still won’t accept the fact that you have been verysuccessful? Alafi:No, they do accept it. They do accept it, and they say, “God, if you are interested, we’ll doeverything.” But they are a firm of ten; they have to convince the ten. And each one of those ten,of course, they have in the back of their minds, “Listen, I put in all of that money. It must begood.” Then they have to find out where is the hole? Otherwise, if they just say yes, they don’tneed all the ten. And they all have to have a function.No, it works. Usually, I don’t know what—50 percent, 60 percent—if I invested and got acompany to a certain point and said, “I would like us to invest together,” it carries a lot ofweight. They would look at it. But they don’t close their eyes and invest. They shouldn’t.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Yes, but I still suspect that when Moshe  Alafi comes to them, it’s a little bit different than justanybody. Alafi:Oh, yes. If I want to raise money now and invest other people’s money, yes? I am sure with myrecord, if I want to raise a few hundred million, I think I’ll get it. But I don’t want it! I’m notgoing to work for others. I don’t want to convince others. I don’t want to bet their money andhave them say, “How come you bet this one and not that one?”—I don’t want it.70 Alafi:Besides the details that we went through, I started thinking as to whoever is reading this, maybethey would like to know what’s the overall take-home lesson. Also, there were a lot ofnewspaper reports that really were not true.Stan [Cohen] kept saying to me, “Moshe, you are the one who started the whole thing. It wasCetus really.” And Stan and Cohen and Lederberg and Djerassi. Although Cetus did not start as a“biotech”; it was the technology of Don Glaser that really never worked. But subsequently it wasCetus that was the first one that got into biotechnology. Swanson, I think I mentioned, was beingkicked out by Kleiner Perkins. He came for a job, and Cape and Farley were scared of him.Swanson knew what the content of the Cetus writeup was, because Kleiner Perkins was aninvestor. Yes? So because they wouldn’t hire him, he went to Boyer, and then when he got themoney from Kleiner Perkins, that was the start of Genentech. I got Longman to negotiate the firstagreement, for insulin, with Lilly. So the biotech startup was really Cetus.But then what subsequently became Biogen came into the picture. Swanson came to Biogen afterhe started Genentech, because he had some agreement with Inco, who were investors inGenentech, yes? And then Inco also invested in Biogen. Swanson flew to London, saying toBiogen not to work on interferon and not to work on different things. It was at a Holiday Innclose to the London Airport, and they just kept him waiting, and he gave a speech, “Youshouldn’t be working on interferon.” But he knew at that time that Charles Weissmann wasworking on it. This is relevant because subsequently there were suits between Schering andGenentech and Hoffmann-La Roche. And in that suit, the German, what’s his name, who workedfor Genentech?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Ullrich? Alafi:No.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Seeburg. Alafi:Seeburg. I saw it myself: he copied what Charles Weissmann either reported or a report, and wascopying the information about interferon. He’d admitted it, you know. So that’s one. I’m tryingto say the history of Genentech. They stole really growth hormone from the university, and theyhad to pay two hundred million.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:It was Seeburg. But Goeddel also is-- Alafi:The guy I’m quoting was Goeddel in the courts. He’s the one who saw the report and copied it.Seeburg is the one that testified against them ultimately and got money.But then there was another company we invested in heavily. I don’t know if I talked about it.That’s Tanox, where Nancy Chang in Houston--<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:I don’t think you talked about this case. Alafi:I’ll tell you the story. She and her husband are from Taiwan. They went through HarvardMedical School. A friend of mine, Goldberg, on the board of Biogen and professor at Harvard,told me this couple, Nancy Chang and her husband, went to Centocor, and then ultimately starteda company in Houston called Tanox. Okay? I visited Tanox and put two million from  AlafiCapital, and two million personally, in Tanox. The husband developed the anti-I.G for asthma,which was approved recently. They were working on it since then. I had somebody from  AlafiCapital on the board of Tanox. She made a presentation to Genentech under confidentiality, andthey said, “We are not interested.” A few months later, Genentech started working on it, and theystarted publishing. She came and said they stole it. I didn’t believe her, I thought she was insane.And then she immediately started a suit against Genentech. I thought she was more insane, tofight with them. Ultimately she won it. They admitted they stole it. And she got payments, andshe got agreements from Genentech and Novartis that she gets 10 percent royalty, whetherGenentech develops it or her. So both started developing the drug. Genentech and Novartis,because Novartis was an investor in her company, whichever molecule works best, she still gets10 percent. And now she went public, and we had about two million shares. I still have a millionshares. It’s about twenty dollars even now. The history of Genentech was really dirty, and someof the board knew it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:The Genentech board? Alafi:Swanson.The other key thing is, nobody at that time really knew what the magnitude of that recombinantDNA technology is, what will it do.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Do you include Stan Cohen? Alafi:No. I think Stan and Lederberg knew that this is a major revolution. The fact is, it’s nonstop, thetechnology and the development. We started a company with Stan in the last two years, and he’sso excited about it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:What is the name of his company? Alafi:F.G.I. Functional Genetics, Inc. It’s in Maryland. I am trying to say it is nonstop, this technology.But I don’t think anybody thought, maybe the scientists, it was going to be that big.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Going back to Cetus, I think you are providing examples that show that Cetus has a claim tobeing the first biotech company. Alafi:They are really. But they didn’t hold onto it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:If you define biotechnology in the wider sense of using living organisms to produce commercialproducts, then you can even include Glaser’s microbial screening device, right? Alafi:Why? It’s a different game. I am trying to think why Don’s machine, which was using petridishes, and ultraviolet or chemical things to produce mutations, would be considered biotech.Now, what he was doing, what we were doing, was imitating nature, in a sense.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:You were speeding up nature, right? Alafi:Correct. And trying to pick the microorganism that would work. Playing with the genes and thechromosomes is a separate thing. Otherwise Don Glaser would be the one who should get theNobel Prize in that field. But he didn’t.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:But if you define biotechnology in a narrower way as genetic manipulation at the molecularlevel—recombinant DNA, monoclonal antibodies—then I think Cetus’ claim to being the firstbiotech company might be a bit more dubious. As you said, Cape and Farley rejected Swansonwhen he went to them. Alafi:Yes, but they had already started out with Stan’s technology.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Had they? Alafi:Confirm that with Stan. I am sure they did. Stan would know exactly the dates. Kleiner Perkinswere investors in Cetus. Swanson saw what we were doing, and he went to Boyer and said, “Iwill show you what we could do.” Perkins came and said to Farley and Cape, “Look what we aredoing at Genentech, and how come you at Cetus are not showing results?” Confirm that withStan. They already were doing projects using recombinant DNA, only they were looking fornothing less than a hundred or five hundred million dollar project. That’s a key point.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:My memory is that Stan became a consultant of Cetus in 1975. And Genentech wasn’t evenfounded until 1976. So the question is, what was Stan doing as consultant? Was he able topersuade Farley and Cape to actually begin to apply recombinant DNA technology? Alafi:Now, I’ll tell you, but you have to fill in the dates, and Stan has to fill in the dates. Stan andLederberg came at some point when Cape was in Hawaii and said, “This is the new technology[recombinant DNA], and I know ours isn’t working, and that’s what you should do.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:You were there? Alafi:I was there. I was chairman, and I said to Lederberg and everybody, “Okay, we will start in thatfield.” Yes?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Can you remember when that was? Alafi:Stan should remember. Cape came back from Hawaii, and said, “What is this? We haveagreements in other fields, we have all of that.” And I think he didn’t realize what he was doing.But once he started looking into it [recombinant DNA], then he jumped on board. He knew howto do these things. So, I am pretty sure, because both Stan and Lederberg said that’s what we[Cetus] should be doing.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Stan, as you know, never throws anything away. [laughs] Alafi:Yes, I understand.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Does the name David Gelfand name mean anything to you? Alafi:Oh, yes. He was there at Cetus before I left, and he came from UCSF.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:My understanding is that he was brought to Cetus specifically to do recombinant DNA. Alafi:He brought something, you are right. But I don’t know what he brought. And that’s prior toStan?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:No. It’s after. Alafi:They hired him because he had the certain technology.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:The questions are when did Gelfand come? And were there scientists at Cetus using recombinantDNA before Gelfand came? We need Stan Cohen to clear this up. But it’s a big point, becauseGenentech claims to be the first biotech company. Alafi:It’s not true! Stan knows exactly when Boyer did what. And that is key. My memory is bad.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Do you have more on your mind that you wanted to clear up? Alafi:Not really. I will let ideas come, but go ahead.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:I have some general questions related to venture capital. Did you have a rule of thumb about howactively you would become involved in managing a company? Alafi:Personally?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Personally, yes. Doing more than just appearing at a board meeting. Alafi:Yes. I did run a company before.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Oh, I know you did. I mean in terms of investment. Alafi:Yes. I was at Cetus. I had a room there. I was involved in all the decisions, all the time, until Ileft. Not running the company, but discussing strategies, what agreements. We went with them[Cape and Farley] when we negotiated agreements with Schering. I was at all of these thingsbecause it was fascinating to me, the whole process. And I knew more than they did, becausethey never ran a company. So with Cetus, yes, I was actively involved in running the company.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Was it mainly Cape and Farley that you were interacting with? Alafi:Yes, and Don came every now and then.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Right. Alafi:With Biogen, it was different. It had its own management, and I was on the board. But I wasinvolved a lot in the beginning. You have one of Weissmann’s articles. He feels I saved it. Theysaved it really. I didn’t save it. So, I was involved in the beginning with the presidents andnegotiations. I was in the negotiations when we made that deal where we got 15 percent of saleon interferon. You know, that made seventy-five, a hundred million a year. I was there andKevin Landry from T.A. So that’s how we got involved more and more. And then once thestructure and the president were established, it became just board meetings.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:It was harder to be involved in Biogen, wasn’t it, because where was Biogen? In the early days,it was really a collection of academic laboratories that had agreed to do some commercial work.Am I right? Alafi:That’s right, but we also quickly started a company in Geneva, where they hired people andstarted working there. So it’s a combination. Charles did interferon in his lab in Zurich at theuniversity. Ken Murray must have done it in Edinburgh, yes? But the company also had labs andwas working on projects also in there. How much interferon was worked in Charles’ lab versusin—. With Charles, he controlled everything in his own lab. The others, there was some researchin the university labs, some had to be done in Biogen. Then it changed when we got in Boston.We had a president. And then Wally Gilbert took over after Cawthorn. And even though thatsame arrangement persisted, there became more and more research in the company.You are right, Biogen was different. And that’s maybe how Genentech beat Biogen, because itwas all in one place, concentrated in business. It fits into their lab project, their own project, andit is in their life and death, although it was in a sense, who can beat the others first.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:And perhaps too, it made a difference that the scientists at Biogen were senior people, seniorscientists. And you talked about their egos, you know, particularly Gilbert. Weissmann I’m surehas an ego, and rightfully so. The scientists at Genentech, in general, were very young people. Alafi:That made a lot of difference.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Yes, I think so. Alafi:Yes, and it created a problem for the young people who were working in Biogen, because theyhad the competition of their seniors also working in their lab. But also it was not healthy. Iremember Charles Weissmann was working on beta-interferon and so was Walter Fiers. Andthey would come and would not divulge what they were doing in their labs.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:To each other? Alafi:Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:[laughs] In the same company! Alafi:Geneva and Cambridge were working on erythropoietin. And they were competing. And in spiteof that, the concept worked.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Yes, isn’t that amazing? So quite a different history, isn’t it? Alafi:Oh, yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Do you think that if there hadn’t been the geographic distance, you would have wanted tobecome more involved with Biogen, in the way you had on a day-to-day basis with Cetus? Alafi:No, because I felt two things. It really needed more professional management to understand thepharmaceutical industry. I have some common sense, but it’s a technology that even though Iwas a physiologist I couldn’t really feel comfortable enough with. No, I felt it needed betterpeople.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Who was there at Biogen in those early days who knew how to run a company, who knew thepharmaceutical industry, who knew how to take something from the bench to a product? Alafi:First, we had Adams who is an attorney from Inco. He ran it while he was running all over. Oncewe found a place in Geneva, we hired Rob Cawthorn from Pfizer. But we didn’t understand atthat time his British small-talking; he was given twenty more IQ points because he spoke with aBritish accent. [laughter] But he was in marketing; he really didn’t understand the researchpeople. I remember he was on vacation once. I spent a month in Geneva looking at how theywere doing things and wrote pages and pages. Rob came, and I said, “I have to see you, if youhave half an hour,” and he looked at all those three hundred pages, and he said, “I know all ofthat.” And then he left for Greece. Yes? Subsequently Gilbert said he will run the company. Butwe made another mistake. On the one hand, we say, “Gilbert is a Nobel Prize winner.” (Did heget it yet or not?)<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:He got the Nobel in 1980. Alafi:We thought he knows how to run a lab, so let him run Biogen. That means we are in a phase ofscience development. But he ran it like a graduate school. And that was a disaster. Then we hadan interim president, and then we got--<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Vincent? Alafi:Vincent. We interviewed him in Boston. It was so clear that he knows what to do.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:I think it was you that also made the very good point about Genentech. The contract they madewith Eli Lilly on insulin avoided these problems in that-- Alafi:I introduced him to my good friend, the ex-chairman of Schering-Plough, with the idea I wasgoing to invest in Genentech. But after I did all of that, Swanson said, “You can just invest ahundred thousand, and you can’t do anything with Biogen.” I said, “Drop dead.” [laughter] Igave him Longman, and Longman is the one who negotiated that for him. He was ex-chairmanof Schering-Plough. I had him on the board of Cetus. And then I loaned him for Swanson, and hehelped him negotiate that contract.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:What criteria do you use to decide when a company is ready to go public? Alafi:The world’s changed. Today is different from those days. I’ll give you an example of Cetus. Wedidn’t know how much money we had to raise for different branches. All we knew was howmuch we needed money for another year or two, and then we said we had to sell the minimumamount of stock. We made an evaluation, what’s the minimum we could sell to raise money.Nobody knew how long it takes, and how much money is involved in that whole technology—nobody.When the whole technology came to pharmaceuticals from the agreements we made at Cetus,they were scared to death. They were afraid, what if a small lab finds insulin or something, andgoes to their competitor. So they were jumping to make deals. With the requirement to jump tomake deals, so this company [Cetus] had to grow and make more money, Wall Street gotexcited. So Wall Street started taking whatever comes there to raise money. And Cetus raised ahundred-million-plus, and I don’t think Wall Street knew what the hell they were doing. AndGenentech raised I don’t know what, and the stock went to eighty-nine—I don’t remember.Nobody knew, neither Swanson nor Wall Street. This is the new thing; it’s going to cure alldiseases, and you better put money in it.What happened subsequently, pharmaceutical companies got smart: they could do it[recombinant DNA] too. They would not jump and pay through the teeth for the technology; theycould make payments. Wall Street got smart: this can’t take hundreds of millions any more, yes?More and more companies started coming public, and the need for a lot of money became obvious; it wasn’t obvious in the beginning. So the requirement to go public, the venture groupwere willing to put money. And the venture group also had a time limit. They can’t wait eightyears for the product to come. So there was this hype, deliberate or not deliberate, and the publicwas dying to get into this thing. So the public market became available because of all of theseforces.But today, it’s much different, in spite of the bubble. Today, the investors got smart. They say, Iam putting money in, a hundred dollars today. How much more money are you going to need todevelop a product? And how much more are you going to raise, and how much am I going to bediluted? And show me. When we started Biogen, Amgen, nobody asked, “How long does ittake? Which have we missed? We didn’t know it’s five hundred million to develop things.” Nowthey know the answers.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Did you know? Alafi:Nobody knew—nobody. We did not have pharmaceutical people.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:If you had known, do you think you-- Alafi:We would have been scared and would not have started a company.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Has your approach to investing been influenced in any way by the fact that the venture capitalindustry today has a more due-diligence approach to its investments? Alafi:Did I change anything?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Yes. Alafi:No, I’m still the same. I invested in a company I started with Stan because I know him. He toldme what he wants to do, and he couldn’t get funded anywhere. And I thought, it’s worth a bet.We started a company with two Muslims from Bosnia, and I knew they’re smart. I’m the onlyone who put money in them. And now after they developed products, three, four major venturecapital firms are putting money into them. But I didn’t put in more than two, three days withthem and decided to start it. The new investors put in due diligence before they decide to putmoney. I know them all. I even have investments in some of those funds. They are safer, but Igamble. I gamble most of the time.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Do you still stick by your faith in people? Alafi:Until they screw up. Until I see they were not what I thought. Not genuine. Usually, they allprove to be competent. A lot of them, not all of them. I’ve been fooled a few times. And if theyare real competent, you don’t have to worry at night.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Do you like the speed of decision-making and the way business moves in the United States? Alafi:Yes, because that’s how you beat the big companies. A big company, to really make a decisionto go into a certain area, they have to have reports and reports and reports, and all of that. In asmall biotech company, it’s really made by two, three, four people. You might not make it, butthat’s what you have, flexibility. And your life depends on it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:How does the Middle East and its attitude toward doing business fit into the picture that you’redrawing? Alafi:First of all, I come from a place where the thief of Baghdad came from. [laughter] Ali Baba andthe forty thieves. My father was in commerce. The way they made deals is you sit and bargain.They’d sell you a hundred thousand yards for a dollar, and they’d shake hands and that’s it.There is no written agreement; there is nothing. And when the material comes, they deliver.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:What about their attitude towards risk? Alafi:There was no risk in terms of big companies there. There aren’t companies. Then comes theother aspect. Since they are penniless, they are bigger gamblers, and they have a saying, “Apenniless man is safe in a caravan.” So you could gamble. I think they are bigger gamblers,coming from there—big numbers. The Indians in London, or the Iraqis all over the world, theycan gamble because all they need is to eat. So they have that spirit, a lot of it. And I think theAmericans have it.I was educated in a French school in Baghdad. As Jews we were told, “No money, no land,nothing helps you.” We have been persecuted for thousands of years and kicked out from onecountry to another. I still remember when I was in school. The only thing that’s important to ourmothers is what you have in your head. That’s what you are going to have with you. That’s whyI never was worried about anything. I came to New York. I didn’t care; I just was curious. Thesebuildings are high; it’s going to take a long time to get up there. [laughs]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:[laughs] This idea that it’s what’s in your head that counts came through your education andthrough your family?80 Alafi:It is a Jewish thing; I think it’s all over the world. That’s why I think Jews are motivated. It’s likethe Chinese. They really believe that’s their survival.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Okay, last question. Alafi:Oh, wait, I want to say one more thing. To be married to the right people is very important.[tape interruption]My wife Ginger enjoyed that game. She’s from Berkeley. It’s fun, you know? So I never worriedwhether she wants to live in a big house. It was just a game.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Yes. So often when I talk to people, seldom do the circumstances of their personal lives comeinto their discussion of their careers. And yet, the impact in every case, I would suggest, is goingto be positive or negative in a net way. It is important, I think, how supportive or not your spouseis. Alafi:Oh, I agree. It’s a game. It’s useless to have all of those stocks and shares in the bank. Give itaway! And that’s what she likes to do.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:[laughs] The last question is, what do you think that the U.S. government and perhaps thebusiness community here need to do to maintain this country’s entrepreneurial edge? Alafi:We have dinner with Charlie Townes in Chinatown. We were talking about China, one hundredthirty billion Chinese. They are highly motivated. They are cheap. They can get money from theworld. They can get technology. What’s going to save the world?[tape interruption]The Americans know how to innovate. And the government spends a tremendous amount onresearch, whether to the NIH or to our military. This is where a lot of the technologies camefrom. The survival of the West will come from innovation. Not cheap labor, not money, becauseChina can get money from any bank. Technology, they can get it. They are producingeverything. So it’s constant innovation. I almost wondered, because in a few years, they willproduce Mercedes better than they can produce them in Germany, at maybe one tenth of the cost.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Why do you keep doing this? Alafi:Because I think it’s the most exciting game. I’m not doing it for money. Therefore I can makebetter decisions. To bet on what’s exciting can be really fun and useful for the world. I feel goodabout Biogen, Amgen, all of that. I have created a lot of jobs. I don’t think of this every day.When I decide to invest, Chris and I see the people. I am glad he’s excited he’s doing it. It’s fun.I don’t play golf, and even if I did, that’s boring.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:[laughs] Alafi:This is something I could do in my sleep; I could do if I’m traveling in Tahiti. I have friends nowin science all over the world; it’s fun to hear everything. I could do it ten times even bigger, butI’m not interested to. I do not want to kill myself; I want to do it nicely. So, I still do it. I’ll do ituntil it’s not fun anymore.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Is there anything else you wish to say? Alafi:No, thank you for taking the time.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer:Well, my pleasure.
