 Johnson: [adjusting his clothing] Remember that guy in that movie who sat on his coat?The one where they said, “I’m mad as hell and I’m not going to take it anymore.” There was a news commentator in there. They were teaching that whenyou sit at the desk, like an anchorperson, you sit on your coattails so that itpulls your coat down. All right. I’m ready!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] Well, you mentioned as we were talking before the recording thatyour family goes way back to the 1600s. Johnson: It goes back to primeval times, actually!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, well, true. In this country, I should have said. Johnson: This guy John Johnson came over, I don’t know quite why, religion, I don’tknow what, or opportunity, but he came to New England, to Ipswich in 1635,so I think I’m fourteen generations later. I’m very proud of that family, not forthe usual reasons—because they were artisans and workmen and the kind ofpeople that built the country. They later on became bankers, and stuff likethat, in smaller towns and small cities like Decatur, Illinois. There are dozens,hundreds of families like this, came early, worked the fields, worked atcarpentry and built the country, both literally and figuratively. It’s nothing,except I have pride in it. It doesn’t affect my own life very much. It gives meacceptability when I go to a dinner in New England once in a while, that’sabout it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] Where did they come from? Johnson: They came from a place called Herne Hill in Kent. I visited there, a littletown, it isn’t much bigger than it was in 1635—has about three pubs and threechurches and about, I don’t know, 1500 people. Even clay pipes from thoseold days were still—I dug some out of the dirt. So that town isn’t changedmuch.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, skipping through time, I know from my research that you were born inIllinois. Johnson: I was born in Quincy, Illinois. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, and how had the family gotten there? Johnson: Well, how that happened is—my dad’s from St. Louis, my mother’s fromQuincy, although she was born in Indian Territory in a place called Muskogee,Okalahoma. So the short version of my parents is my mother was born inMuskogee, which was then Indian Territory in 1903; my dad in 1901 in St.Louis. They both went to the university. Mother later moved to Quincy—andwent to the University of Illinois and met my dad there. My dad was a majortrack star, a hurdler with the Olympic team of 1924, if you remember theChariots of Fire movie. He was on that team. So I grew up, and he became a track and field coach. He went to DrakeUniversity to start with after being an assistant at Illinois in 1928, and I wasborn shortly after that. But my grandfather was a doctor so my mother wentback to Quincy about the time I was about to arrive—I think to save money totell you the truth! [chuckling] So I grew up, until I was twelve in 1940, in DesMoines and became aware, like all kids, that there was a track team and thenthere’s other sports teams. And I learned there’s a university, and then Ilearned there are businessmen—so you burrow outwards from yourbackground. So track and field—I was born into it , and I’ve followed itclosely ever since.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You were a runner. Johnson: I was a Stanford track athlete. I sort of assumed since my dad was an Olympicathlete I’d be that good, but I wasn’t. I was a nationally-ranked 400-meterrunner, 440-yard runner, but didn’t make it to the Olympics.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that a disappointment to your father? Johnson: He never expressed it. In 1940 he came to Stanford to be the coach, but by thetime I went to Stanford he had left Stanford after the war and was doing otherthings. So my coach was a fine man, but not my dad. My dad alwaysemphasized grades and studies and other things. He never emphasized—heknew very well, it turned out, that I wanted to run and I did run. He came tomy meets and always watched, not all of them but many of them. I don’t thinkhe was disappointed, in most ways, because I did have a good academic careerat Stanford. The thing that was so good about being on the track team, I didn’thave to pay any tuition. I had a scholarship. Our family means were modestenough so that was a huge help to my parents. I what they call “hashed,”which is like working waiting tables and stuff, but the combination of somemoney from home and my scholarship and my work, I got through Stanford with only had one semester where I had to borrow money from the university.I was studying mechanical engineering.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now why mechanical engineering? Johnson: Well, when I went to Palo Alto High School, we had a really superb physicsteacher there named Henry Martin. Everyone has this story in his or her life,had some great teacher that really influenced you, gave you understandingabout something. I really felt at the high school level I understood physics. Atthe same time, that was when the A-bomb was going off and RobertOppenheimer, who later became [the subject of] an opera, I might add, wasfamous. But I became interested in the physical sciences and loved mathanyway. When I went to Stanford, I decided I’d be a physics major, and it took me onlya couple of years to decide that I wasn’t Robert Oppenheimer and I wasn’tEinstein. I was a good but not top-level physicist type of person. By then I’dmet a friend of my dad’s who was a superintendent of a steel mill, and I beganto think—at some point it strikes you—I’ve got to have a job some day. So Iswitched to engineering, figuring that somehow that that could lead to someactive employment, because I didn’t really think that I would be a successfulacademic physicist—and I wouldn’t have been, I don’t think. I did well in my engineering courses, and so I had a nice balance, I thought,between my academic life and my fraternity life. It was a wonderfullymeaningful experience to be in my fraternity house. It was the home awayfrom home. It’s the first time you leave home—and you don’t have to be in afraternity to have this experience. I did—a bunch of brothers that I’m close tothese days! So the third part of it was, I’d say, the social side of it, with asmall s for sure. And then being on the track team and the effort that went intothat. Some rewards from winning some good races. I had a good nationallevel success, not international, so that was satisfying but frustrating toobecause I wanted to do better. I graduated from Stanford in 1950, and without going through all the stories ofit, I got into Harvard Business School.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now why business school? Johnson: Well, at that point another thing happened in my life. As I studied engineeringand did design work and met a number of guys from all over the countrywhose fathers were doing different things, or families, and some guys werebusinessmen, some people I knew well were—so I began to realize that Ireally hadn’t thought much about the business world. It wasn’t part of my childhood. My mom was an English teacher and my dad was a coach. Theywere respectful of—they weren’t anti-business—they just weren’t thatbusinesslike. Then I began to meet people who were. My first thought was tobe a ranger and to be a forest service type of guy. But I decided not to do thatleap. I was thinking about going to Oregon State which I could do. They had agood track team in those days—it doesn’t have one now—and could do thatand study forestry. But then I saw in my many summers in the mountains,which I did hiking, I saw the rangers had to pick up a lot of garbage, so Idecided that wasn’t going to be what I wanted to do. What I didn’t know—every profession, you have to pick up some garbage! [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You learned that! Johnson: I learned that. But anyway, I switched to engineering, and then I began to getthe idea of why don’t I make a decent salary and make some money? And thatnever was part of—I don’t know how to explain it, but our family had a goodlife. We were never poor but the orientation was not to—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: To make money. Johnson: Was not money. Business school seemed like the way. Then I began to realizethat production interested me, being a production executive. Making thingsinterested me. I spent a summer working in a steel mill, and I just like thatatmosphere of the smoke and the flames. It seemed glamorous to me. A lot ofguys found consulting and investment banking glamorous. But [I liked] beingwith those kind of people that worked hard, and I loved exercise anyway. Ithought well, gee, if I can find a job where I can do both, have a pathway toget promoted and to do physical work and to be with those kinds of peoplethat worked in the mills which are mostly superb men in almost every case. SoI switched to engineering. I had switched to engineering before that, but then Irealized that I wanted to go to business school because I realized that thatwould open up other horizons and [I would] learn about other things. So the two eye openers, I would say, that occurred to me from a technologyoriented high school era—leaving athletics aside for the time; that was just anextra thing—were the courses they made you take, Western Civ. and thosethings. What a drag, I thought, to study all these old guys in Italy and all thatstuff. It turned out, of course, as practically everyone says, it opened up therest of my life later! [chuckling] So I loved that—I didn’t like it when I tookit, but I did well with it. To an engineer it almost seems like soft stuff. Then Itook some other courses, and naturally English and all that, so Stanford wasgood about making the engineers have a broader education. It was very, verywise of them.  You also had to take engineering accounting—you didn’t have to take it but itwas offered, and engineering economics you had to take. So as an engineer atStanford, no matter whether it was electrical or mechanical or civil[engineering], which were the three main branches in those days, or industrial,you had a sort of an economic and non-technology side to your engineeringtraining that was very helpful later.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now was that unusual in engineering schools at that time? Johnson: I can’t answer that. I don’t know, but I think it was unusual. Dean Terman wasour dean, Frederick [E.] Terman, whose father was a very famouspsychologist, I might add.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right. Johnson: [He] had a broad view of education, and so he was quite insistent on havingtopflight technological instruction in math. But he supported fully theuniversity’s requirement that engineers had to take Western Civilization andEnglish and other stuff. So that was a good part of going to Stanford. Then the idea of going to business school—I didn’t get in at first becausewhen I interviewed for the business school, I told the interviewer, whose namewas Saltonstall by the way—he was some relation to the old Saltonstalls—hesaid, “What is it you really want to do with your career?” I said, “I don’tknow.” It was a very honest answer, “But I want to go to business schoolbecause I’d like to learn some other facets of things I can do with my lifebeyond being an engineer.” It was exactly the truth. Wrong. [chuckling] So Igot a nice letter from them saying, “The interviewer liked blah, blah, blah, butno, you can’t get in because you don’t seem to be focused enough on whatyou want to do.” Then I went back to Washington, DC to run in the national AAV track andfield meet. I jumped on an airplane and went up to see the admissions officerat Harvard. I didn’t exactly pound on his desk, I said, “Are you kidding? I gottop grades, I’m a nationally-ranked athlete, and as far as doing the classroomwork, I’m the kind of guy you want around here.” Sort of—what’s the matterwith you? I didn’t quite say it that way but that was my tone. I scrambled around and tried to get people to write letters for me to say theyfelt [Harvard] should have let me in. One of my fraternity brother’sgirlfriend’s father was a prominent guy, so I went out and interviewed himand he helped me. But in the end, they let me in. Lewis [B.] Ward was theadmissions director, so when I got in in the fall I went to see him and I saidthank you. He said, “Well, you were very convincing when you came up here! We do look for drive and desire. That’s a pretty important part of it. So youshowed the fact you really wanted to come here. Just do me a favor—don’ttell other people how it worked, will you? I’ll have every guy up herepounding on my desk.” It was kind of an example that if you stay after thingsand you’re persistent and you have zeal and desire, it shows through and youcan do things. I don’t know that I learned a lesson, because I think I was that way to startwith. I wasn’t one of the top students, but I was a good student at businessschool and graduated okay, and then I went in the air force. I had thesebroadening experiences: from an athletics-oriented kid who liked math andscience in high school to somebody who had stuck with the technology side ofit but had the breadth of a Stanford education. They do it differently now, butI’m sure they have an emphasis on breadth still. Then broadening my businessideas by going to business school, [where] I did do what I hoped [to do]. Ilearned a lot about finance; I learned a lot about other things. A lot of guyswanted to go into consulting and investment banking, perfectly importantprofessions for our society. But I still stuck with my engineering [orientation]and I got a job. I went in the air force because it was the Korean War andbecame a maintenance officer.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, don’t go there quite yet. Johnson: Okay. I should wait for the questions.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I happen to know that you took a course from Georges [F.] Doriot. Johnson: I did, yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And he being the name that he is, I’d be interested in hearing yourimpressions of him and the way he taught his course. Johnson: Well, the course was called manufacturing and I took it because it had thatname.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But not because you knew of him? Johnson: I knew about him as the founder of American Research and Development[Corporation], which was very much a pioneer venture firm, but I didn’t knowanything about venture capital. It had been named in the early forties, by aprofessor—I believe his name was [George] Elton Mayo, who coined theterm— <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What was his connection? Johnson: I don’t know. I know that he’s credited with inventing the name. I now knowfrom books I read later that people were doing deals and backing venturesway back in the nineteenth century. There’s a terrific book called, The VisibleHand: [The Managerial Revolution in American Business], whichdescribed—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh yes—[Alfred Dupont] Chandler. Johnson: Exactly. Everybody reads a few books that give them insights, and that bookwas a very important book to me, not so much that I realized how businessorganizations began to change marketplaces, because I realized what wasgoing on back as soon as technology began to become— Well, technology hasalways been there, but new technologies: oil drilling, steel making, and thosethings created business opportunities, although I read that book much later, Imight add.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I’ve read that in those very early days, it was usually the very wealthy familiesthat were doing the investment. Is that what Chandler says as well? Johnson: That’s right, yes. When I first heard about it, the Rockefeller family—Laurance Rockefeller himself did investments, Eastern Airlines and someother things. There was another family or two whose names I can’t recall rightnow—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, the Whitneys were— Johnson: The Whitneys were doing that, yes. There were three or four families ofmeans, and they backed businesses, not necessarily small businesses, but Ididn’t know much about that when I enrolled in the course. I took the courseswe had to take the first year: marketing, finance, and administrative practices,which is kind of a human relations course, and other stuff. So I had thefundamental tools that they wanted every first-year student to have. Second[year], you could branch out, and surprisingly enough, I took some financecourses just because they were interesting. I’ve always liked numbers so theywere pretty numbery.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All these courses that you were taking, did they actually help you later on?  Johnson: Much later on, much later on, Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, go back to Doriot’s course, though. Johnson: Okay. The good part is he was very devoted to his students. He cared a lotabout students. He was a man you could go see and talk to. That was true ofmost of the professors, but Georges Doriot cared about that. And hismanufacturing course was not a course about making anything; it was a courseabout his ideas about business and his philosophies. Some of it was just plainbaloney, like [imitating Doriot’s French accent] “Never trust a man who wearsa bow tie.” He thought that bow ties were a symbol of some sort of frivolousor not standard behavior, so I think he didn’t want people to be different fromothers. Then he said, “Remember there’s a great tape recorder going all the time,”which is fairly true. So what he was saying is, “Behave yourself, because ifyou’re going to cut corners, you can’t.” So I think as a moral leader he wasvery strong and that was good. In fact, it was vital. I don’t remember therebeing much discussion directly about ethics at the business school, butindirectly very much so and in the courses. But I think that course could havebeen condensed into about five sessions, because he would ramble on an on. Idon’t want to sound like I didn’t respect him, because I did. I respected hisethical standards; I respected his caring about the students, but a lot of what hesaid to me sounded like baloney, and much of it was. I remember one incident in which he said, “When you go to a new town,” Iwon’t imitate his accent because that’s too cheap, but I’ll say what he said andthat is, “When you go to a new town and you want to get known and meetpeople, start your job and then when some prominent man dies, write thewidow a letter and say that while you didn’t know her husband, you knowhow important he was to the town.” He said, “Almost surely she’ll write youback and that gives you a chance then to meet people of substance in thecommunity.” I was offended. I hate it now, I hated it then. I thought it wassome of the worst advice you could possibly get, and here’s this man who isdeeply ethical himself. There’s no question about that; he’s demonstrated it inmany ways—to give some advice like that which was a little too pragmatic forme or for many of my classmates. We marveled at that, and as you can see, Istill remember every word of that advice. It was terrible advice! But most of the class was about working hard, achieving goals, settinggoals—setting goals and achieving goals and about behaving yourself. And hegave that in different ways, but he did throw a little baloney in there becausehe was a human being. I had other professors, I felt, that did a much better jobof preparing me with things I didn’t know. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why does Doriot’s name stand out to such a degree? Johnson: Because he taught so many guys for so long, and I think many people feeldifferently from the way I do. They believe that his guidance and what he saidwas important and gave them insight into the way the world and businessworks that they wouldn’t have had without him—and that’s true. Heunderstood the subtle side of it, the politics of business, the behavioral part ofit, the getting to be known and making your way—and this great taperecorder, it’s true. All the Harvard Business School guys you talk to will havetaken that course and they’re going to have different views about it. I have amixed review that comes out plus because of the ethical guidance and his deeppersonal interest in the students.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, well, that’s a great credit to him. Johnson: I think so, I think so. He’s remembered well there, and he also started the firstventure capital company I ever heard of, American Research andDevelopment.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: When you were there? Johnson: My class was ’52. I think he started it along about the time we were there,maybe before ’52. I don’t know that though. But I don’t remember evertalking to him about it or people talking about venture capital at all when Iwas in school. It just didn’t—the name didn’t come up. I learned later that theterm had been invented by Elton Mayo, if that’s the correct name, in the earlyforties, middle forties.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So Doriot wasn’t talking to you about risk investment. Johnson: No. He didn’t talk about investments at all, very much. He gave examples ofpeople who’d succeeded, why he thought they succeeded. I remember therewas a woman that invented Pepperidge Farm bread that he had come speak.Margaret Rudkin? [chuckling] It doesn’t make any difference. I can’tremember what I learned yesterday—sometimes I can remember what Ilearned fifty years ago, though! But anyway, she told about getting hercompany going. He used guest speakers some, not every time. She was veryeffective because she had started—that was an entrepreneurial [business].Doriot talked about starting a business though her. My memory doesn’t bringup much talking about entrepreneurship, though, separate from careers, whichis a little bit different subject. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And then as you said, it was the Korean War. Johnson: I got out in ’52 and by then I had met my wife, which is always a diversion.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] You said that she was a Vassar graduate. Johnson: She was a Vassar girl; she got out in ’51. She had spent one year at Stanfordso she met some guys. She met a guy on the track team who gave me hername. [chuckling] So when I went back east I looked her up in New York, andshe was finishing up at Vassar, and so we dated quite a bit during that period.I had postponed my military obligations. I got deferments, to make a longstory short, in order to finish school. Then when school was over I had theduty to and actually looked forward to—I got a direct commission in the airforce as a maintenance officer. In one way I made a mistake. I should have volunteered to be a squadronmaintenance officer and gone to Korea and served. I didn’t have the eyes to bea pilot at that time in my life. I still don’t have the eyes, but I’m a pilotbecause civil pilots don’t have to have the same eyes. So I didn’t sign up forflight training and I would have, I think. I decided I wanted to get a job in theair force that would be something like a business job. It was one of those kindof decisions that efficient young MBAs make. So I worked in different depotsaround the United States, after my training, organizing production lines andbeing kind of an industrial engineer—that’s what they hired. They hired, Ithink, it was sixty graduates from our class that were in the air force at thesame time.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Really! Johnson: They called it Operation Harvard Second Lieutenants. I didn’t go into thesupply side; I went into the maintenance side.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because you were an engineer? Johnson: Oh I don’t know. That’s what I asked for and that’s what I got. Now thereason it wasn’t a mistake—from a life’s point of view it would have beengreat to go on to Korea and been part of a squadron and keep the guys flying,but because I was stateside and began to keep on seeing this wonderful youngwoman. We got married just before I got out of the air force, so I think my lifehad its course, very important part, because I did stay stateside. If I’d gone toKorean for two years, something else would have happened, so my life wouldbe completely different.  But I did stay here. I didn’t fight anybody or ever have a combat job. I did dosome interesting work organizing overhaul lines and modification projects. Ieven did the analysis for a project, and my boss classified it top secret and Ionly had a secret clearance. So I said, “Well, I can’t even read my own report,right?” He said, “All it means is I have to store it in my safe.” I had somewonderful bosses in the air force, guys I worked for. That was my first job,really, out of school. I had these summer jobs where I was doing just everydaywork, and then after that I went to work in the steel plant.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, one question before you leave the— Johnson: I’m racing along!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: —the air force. Is that the origin of your love of planes? Johnson: I really loved airplanes even in high school. I remember our physics teacher,the same guy I was talking about, said, “Somebody wants to give some peoplesome rides, in an airplane, and if you sign up right after class we can takesomeone.” Well, I didn’t make it. I didn’t sign up fast enough, so I remembernot getting that airplane ride, although I’d had some anyway. But I wasinterested in planes all along. Certainly when I got into the air force I realizedthe pilots run the air force. I think it’s still true. They try to make careers foreverybody else, and they do have good careers, but the air force is aboutflying. It was then. Now it’s more missile men, but it was about flying then.So I hitched—I got rides for test flights and went up in airplanes a lotwhenever I could get somebody to take me up. So I became really interestedin airplanes. The answer to you question is yes. My time in the air force gaveme a love of flying and airplanes that I might not have had otherwise.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now the steel mill—how did that happen? Johnson: My time in the air force was good, but I had interviewed in the steel companyat the business school. The vice president of sales came around, a guy namedJack Smith. I said, “I’m very interested in working in the steel industry, but Idon’t want to be a salesman. I want to have a job in the mill.” Because by thenI’d worked in the summers at Kaiser Steel.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, it’s right here. Johnson: No, Kaiser Steel is in southern California. Right here in that sense.The wholething appealed to me, the kind of work, and I knew that while many of myfriends had gone into other downtown-type of jobs—that just wasn’t for me. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: When you say it appealed to you, you mean in the getting down to the nittygritty and actually doing something. Johnson: Yes. On the wall, there’s a picture of an open-hearth shop and a first helperwalking up to a furnace. And on my desk there, there’s the last ingot as Ibecame a foreman and made steel there. The last ingot I made is sitting on mydesk there.Inland Steel had written me a letter while I was in the air force saying, “We’dlove you to come see us when you get out.” They have a little tickler file, so Igot this letter from them about two months before I got out, and a friend of myfather’s was also the production—I think it was general manager of the mill—so that helped too. But whatever. I went to them, interviewed them. I wentdown to Birmingham, interviewed in an airplane overhaul company to get ajob too, and I decided for the long term the steel mill job was what I wanted todo, even though I knew a lot about the other job to start with. So Inland Steel took me in, and I was there within two weeks of the day wewere married. We had a nice little company house near the mill, a very nicerent, and I began to work. In the first couple of years I just did hourly jobs. Itwas a complicated deal because I didn’t join the union, but the union let mework an hourly job because they liked the idea, so I worked alongside of thevarious jobs without taking anybody’s place. It was just a deal they had withthe union.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, and that’s what they like about it? Johnson: To get the young guys trained. If they were going to make foreman theywanted them to be able to do the work. The company wanted it, and I thinkthe men wanted to see that if you’re going to be a foreman someday, althoughthat wasn’t overt. My first superintendent said to me, the main job, he said, “Isto get to know the men. We’ve had other college boys in here.” I didn’t saymuch about Harvard Business School. It was in my record, but not in mydiscussion with them. He said, “The main thing you’ve got to do is learn toknow the men. So I want you to go out there and I want you to work hard andshow them you can do the work, and I want you to take the time to get toknow them.” Best advice you could hand me—just great.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: This was Jack Smith? Johnson: No, Jack Smith was the vice president of sales. Oh no, it’s another world inthe steel—the sales guys. No, my first superintendent was named George Lawton, but it doesn’t make any difference. He’s one of those heart of goldtype of guys who really cared about his people. Anyway, he takes this youngguy in and he puts me on the floor. I worked in the labor gang; I worked in thepit where they pour the steel, and finally they put me up on the floor where thesteel was made. I worked on the different furnaces, and I learned the thirdhelpers do the work around the furnace, second helper takes care of the backof the furnace, and the first helper runs the furnace. And over time I did allthose jobs alongside of these guys and learned them. I think one of the most exciting moments I ever had was when guy namedSmokey Timm, a first helper who was sort of a big, almost typical guy butclearly a leader of the others too, even though he ran his own furnace, he said,“Hey kid, why don’t you have a cup of coffee with me?” I could have huggedhim! [chuckling] It was a moment of acceptance and it meant so much to me. But then after about three years of filling in the summers as a fill-in foremanin the scrap yard. An open shop hearth partly is a scrap yard. There’s a hotmetal mixer where the molten iron comes, there’s the furnaces, there’s thepouring pit, and the auxiliaries that service all that. I trained in all those placesand then finally, the culminating experience, after being a fill-in foreman andactually being a foreman in the scrap yard and in the pit, I became an assistantmelter. The melter had a group of six furnaces, and his job as a foreman job, is towork with the men. I won’t go through all the details of steelmaking, itdoesn’t even exist now in the same way—but you determine when thefurnaces need to be charged, you look at the furnaces, make sure they’re ingood shape, you get them charged up with scrap iron, the scrap iron would bemelted, then you pour in the hot metal which is molten iron. Then you’ddecide when the heat had to be tapped. There was an assistant melter whoworks with the foreman, but when there’s two furnaces at the same time, themelter will often tell [the assistant], “You go tap number 38.” So you take asample ingot and check the chemistry, you do a lot of things; you learn fingerknowledge and you learn the business of making steel in an open-hearthfurnace. So finally, when the melter was going on vacation, when I first did it they putsomebody else in over me, but finally I got to be the melter. I got to be theforeman, and the men were pretty accepting, but I hadn’t spent those twentyyears that they had.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you were unusual and kind of skipping over some of the time andexperience that most people had?  Johnson: Yes. Their plan for me, if there was any, was to be a foreman for a while. Itwas quite an exciting moment for me the first time I walked on the floor incharge of all six furnaces under me, with the men working there with thecranes and the hot metal and the charging cars and all that. That was really thefirst time in my life where somebody said, “Here’s a major job for you to do.”And you can really screw up in that job. Steel can melt its way through thebottom of the furnace. You can make a mistake and have a whole ladleful ofsteel that doesn’t meet the specifications, is really not worth much.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you like that challenge? Johnson: Oh I loved it, Yes. In fact, I really like that work as much as anything I’veever done, partly because the people were so terrific, and partly because likeany young man or woman for the first time somebody saying, “We believe inyou. You can do this.” And I remember when the quality records came in, mynon-applied heats percentage was as good as the old time pros. It wasn’tbetter, by the way, but it was as good as. Those are called non-aps, nonapplied heats. So I just remembered the excitement and thrill of being able todo that work at a level comparable to the old-timers.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now had you gotten to that level just because of experience and observation?Or did somehow your previous education give you a jump? Johnson: Well, the business school didn’t give me a jump, but I think being an engineerdid—and I think they were pushing me along.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So they saw something in you. Johnson: They hired me for that purpose. Oh I don’t know, there’s many reasons forit—among them was the fact that this friend of my dad was the millsuperintendent many levels up, and I wouldn’t be surprised if he said, “If theguy can do it—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Let him. Johnson: But I don’t think he would have ever said, “If he can’t do it,” because it’s toodangerous. It’s physically dangerous. If you don’t take care of yourself andthe people around you, people get hurt. It’s physically dangerous.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How programmed was the danger issue?  Johnson: A lot of emphasis on safety.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: This is a dangerous job you’d better learn how to deal with it. Johnson: No, it’s not that at all. Inland Steel in the fifties had a training [program]—safety was a big part of the training. We had safety meetings with the menevery week and they had big safety records. We had something called “DaysWithout a Lost-Time Accident.” So we were told by the bosses to be tough onguys who violated the safety rules, and the unions, for the most part, backedyou up. So if guys were doing things that were unsafe— There’s a lot of littletricks like, don’t step on a rail, step over a rail, because if you step on a railyour foot could slide out from under you. I remember the most egregious thing that I heard of—I didn’t see it myself—was a guy had gotten down into an ingot mold and gone to sleep. Before youpour the steel out of the ladle, you go in and inspect to see if there’s any junkin there. I didn’t do this personally, but I know it happened. A guy waschecking the molds, the pit foreman was, and he saw a guy asleep because it’swarm. You pour into warm molds. If they hadn’t checked, that guy’d have hadsteel poured on him. These are fables—is it true? I didn’t see it myself, but theguys who told me it, I believe it. But that would be so egregious that I thinkthey gave him time off. The union was pretty good about cooperating on disciplining people forsafety. The company disciplined the supervisors also, and the supervisorswere expected to observe the safety rules. So the answer to your question is,it’s a dangerous environment, but with proper training we had very few losttime accidents. Another thing though, behind the furnace where the steelcomes out, the tapping site which the second helper runs, you get very, veryhot. And you can have heat exhaustion, so two guys are always back theretogether. So when I was back there and I’d learned to dig out a tap hole. Ilearned how to put the charge in there and open up the furnace—and I did thatwith other guys. But I don’t think you ever had people behind the furnace bythemselves, because if you dropped, it’s just too hot. Somebody had to pullyou out of there. But there wasn’t much of that. We took salt pills, or if youfelt heat exhaustion, you just simply sat down if you felt faint.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you think that the powers that be, whoever they were, were looking at youas you moved up through the hierarchy thinking that this is a potential upperlevel executive? Johnson: That was my view of myself. [laughter] I think they were looking for peopleto be superintendents, to run a department. There were three open-hearth departments. I started off in number 2, and it was the big twenty-four furnaceshop, and then I ended up in number 3 and became assistant superintendent.Earlier I became a general foreman, or the auxiliary general foreman, so Iwasn’t the foreman over the melters even though I’d been doing that; I wasthe foreman over the rest of the operation. And after five or six years I workedsteady days. This was all shift work up until—I don’t remember the exactnumber of years, but out of the eight years I spent there probably at least fouror five were shift work. After being a general foreman and going on steady days, then I became anassistant superintendent back at my old shop where I’d come from. They sortof moved you around so you get promoted, but you get promoted somewhereelse. So I put on a coat and tie, and I had to eat lunch with the big bossesdown in the headquarters. That was fun, but the farther I got from thefurnaces, the more I realized that I wasn’t having so much fun. And we gotreally good pay, by the way. So I never did earn less than my—well, I don’tknow, the guys on Wall Street maybe made more. It was a well-paid job. Sowe lived nicely in our company house. All four of our children were bornduring that period.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh really. And how was your wife doing with steel mill life? Johnson: Well, it was new for her because she was from New York. [chuckling] Herfather was a major oil company executive, but he came from the oil fields.From his point of view, I was doing something completely understandable. Idid what he did! He went in the oil fields; I went in the steel mills. He figuredthat’s what young men do. Sometimes people would say to him, “Can’t youget your son-in-law a better job?” He’d say, “He’s doing what he wants todo!” He was a great guy and ran his company well, but I never wanted to gointo the oil business. It just didn’t appeal to me, so I didn’t have that load ofbeing in a father-in-law’s business anyway. But Cathie did well with it. She was pretty busy having babies and taking ofthem. Bill Draper worked for the same company.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, I was wondering when he was going to come into this work. Johnson: We met him very early on. He had started in our business school class, but hewent off in the infantry to Korea and was in the war, literally, for two yearsand then came back to business school, graduated two years later while I wasin the military, so we both ended up at Inland Steel in the summer of 1954.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: By sheer coincidence, right?  Johnson: By coincidence, oh yes, we didn’t even know each other. But we soon becameacquainted, and Cathie and Phyllis became good friends. They lived fiveblocks away, and so we did lots of things together as a family. Their kids weremore or less the same age of ours—Tim [Timothy C.] Draper. I rememberseeing him when he came home from the hospital! So Bill and I became goodfriends. In 1958, his father and two other guys, three other guys really, hadstarted a pioneer venture firm here called Draper, Gaither & Anderson. Billnever worked in the mill—he was a downtown type of guy, he was asalesman. He left his sales job, which he was good at, and joined his father inthis pioneer venture firm. Since they were coming to Palo Alto where I camefrom in the first place, we came out shortly after they did on a vacation trip,and I introduced them to lots of our friends here who still are our friends. Ithink they would have got going nicely without us, but we at least introducedsome people to whom we’re still close. Then about 1961, a lot of interesting stuff happens—I had an option on fortytwo shares of stock at Inland. Not bad, but I noticed that the grandchildren ofthe founders of Inland and the associated company called Ryerson hadsomething like 350,000 shares of stock. So I thought, wait a minute, thissystem isn’t working as well as it could.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] Yes, not exactly democratic. Johnson: No, no—very democratic! They deserved it, their parents founded thecompanies, but I thought it was better to be a founder and a shareholder than itis to be a worker, even though I was getting promoted and was paid well. Ihad nothing much in ownership.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now were stock options just a matter of course in big companies? Johnson: Well, I know Inland gave out stock options to everybody in the management.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And was that fairly commonplace? Johnson: Don’t know.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Among companies? Johnson: Oh I think companies were giving options, young companies. Inland was avery progressive company, a great place to work. Many years later I gave atalk in Chicago to some entrepreneurial conference, and I was saying, because I was in Chicago, what a great place Inland was and how well they took careof the young guys and how well they trained us in safety—I went out and tookmetallurgical courses they paid for. They were very, very progressive, andthey looked after their people. The big bosses came around the mills once in awhile and you shook hands with them and felt like you were a big dealyourself. So after the speech, a young man came up and said, “I’m Phil Block,” whowas the grandson of one of the founders and he had worked at Inland. He said,“Thanks for saying that.” I think he was doing something else by then, and hisdad had been a vice president of—maybe raw materials or something. It was agreat place and Bill Draper would tell you the same. They just took very goodcare of their people. Anyway, in 1961, by then I had heard about the small business investmentcompanies [SBIC], and I’d heard about venture capital just from reading. Iwas able to save on my salary. Living modestly by most standards, we savedup some money, and I made some investments in Cessna aircraft, amongothers. I’d accumulated, not much, but a little bit of capital from savings.During a visit, Bill said, “Why don’t we start a small business investmentcompany?” He wanted to get on his own as well, but was very close to hisfather, a wonderful man, by the way—William Draper, Jr. The father is juniorand Bill is the third [III]. We were out on a normal vacation trip, for me home, even though my parentslived elsewhere. We sat around his kitchen table, like a lot of otherentrepreneurs around here, and cooked up a small business investmentcompany. Small business investment companies then—they still exist—werecompanies where if you put up $150,000, a group of guys or a person, theywould lend you on what they called a debenture basis another 150,[000], sothat would give you a minimum capital of $300,000. You just put that all upin capital. Then they would lend you four times that, at very low-interest rate,long-term loans, if you would restrict the investment you made to smallbusiness, which they defined for you: a certain number of employees, a certainsales level. One of the interesting things—it could not be in businesses againstthe public interest, such as produced or sold alcohol.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: This sounds like an effort by the government to promote small business. Johnson: Exactly what it was. This is my own interpretation of it: the small businessinvestment company was part of the Small Business Administration. Congressdecided, I think in a bipartisan way we don’t see much of these days[chuckling], that too much business activity was in big companies only, andthat we needed to have a more entrepreneurial society. A really wise decision. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Who was behind that? Johnson: Well, I don’t know exactly. I think it came up during the Eisenhoweradministration, but you know, I don’t know the time, but I know the SmallBusiness Investment Act of ’58 was passed.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So it was very young when you were thinking about it. Johnson: Very young, but we heard about—the SBIC program was one. So I scraped upmy savings and borrowed some from my father-in-law who was very goodabout helping me in what was a big way then! And then Bill got his $75,000together some way.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: He had been worker at Draper, Gaither— Johnson: He had been working at Draper, Gaither from ’58 until ’61 when thishappened.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And so he’d made a little bit of money by then? Johnson: He can tell you that. He saved up something, obviously! I borrowed $50,[000]and had saved up $25,[000]. I remember that much. I don’t know what Billdid. It’s his business. But we needed to get a license. My congressman from Indiana was called Charles [A.] Halleck, who was theminority leader of the house. So this amazed me, but I called up his office andI took a few days off, went back to Washington, and got an appointment withmy representative just by a phone call! It was just a constituent calling.Nobody called for me or nobody paved the way. So I went in his office and hesaid, “I’m glad to meet you.” He was my congressman, but he was alsominority [leader]. He had a pretty fancy office. Then he started picking up thephone—a great showman calling all these big-name guys, “What’s happeningwith the SBIC [Small Business Investment Corporation] bill? When are wegoing to get the appropriations.” And all that stuff. It was a matter of gettingappropriations. I had nothing to do with what happened, but I did find out thatthe appropriation bill was on the way. I met with some SBA [Small BusinessAssociation] people. You had to get them to approve you as people who wererunning this, so they approved Bill and me.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that just a matter of looking if you had enough money?  20 Johnson: No it wasn’t. They checked you out. I presume they checked again—criminalbackground, education. They licensed a lot of people. I don’t remember thenumber that started—let’s say 150 SBICs were licensed over a few years’time. So that was ’61, so by ’62 we got our license. So with a heavy heart Ileft my job in the mills, and left these guys who’d brought me up frombasically nowhere in terms of knowing anything. Bill and I started in 1962.We were delayed slightly because of the birth of our final child on August 6,1962, so after that we moved on out here. I was familiar with the area anyway,so we started our SBIC September of 1962.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, before you launch into that, give us a picture of the landscape in whatwe now call venture capital. And actually, we should stop and change thetape.[End Audio File 1]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What was going on in what we now call venture capital when you werebeginning what became Draper and Johnson? Johnson: Yes, sure. There’s one thing I meant to mention specifically about myborrowing that $50,000, because it was so moving. I hope I can tell withoutbreaking up. My father-in-law, whose name was Eugene Holman, who was avery prominent oil executive in what was called Standard Oil of New Jersey,which is called Exxon now, Exxon Mobil, became fatally ill. [overcome byemotion]. Oh, this is tough [chuckling]. I went to see him and just wish himwell, and he said, “Don’t forget. I’m lending you $50,000.” This is a man onhis death bed. [expels breath] I’m getting too old, I guess, for this! Well, Ithought that was it. But then after he died, his assistant contacted me and said,“Mr. Holman’s left this check.” And it was—you know, it was just great.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, I can see why it has emotion around it. Johnson: Very emotional. But the fact is I’ve been exposed to some great people, menand women in my life, and you can see the standards people have sometimes.[voice breaking] Let’s take a little break, okay?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All right.  Johnson: Well, first of all, there were very few venture firms when Bill and I got startedin ’62. We had an informal group that met monthly for dinner. There weretwelve of us, and it was called the Western Association of Small BusinessInvestment Companies, which itself was the forerunner of the WesternAssociation of Venture Capitalists. So for several months, probably a year ormore, there were twelve—all guys, I might add, who had SBICs. One womancame to those meetings, she was an officer in the company. About half ofthem were doing real estate and other things that weren’t really—it’s certainlyventure and it’s certainly capital, but it’s not what we think of technology andbiotech and technically-oriented venture capital. The characteristics of the business landscape—first of all, let me talk aboutthe geographical landscape. These were still individual towns. When I was akid, Palo Alto was a town. Mayfield, now called California Avenue, was aseparate town. They were pretty much connected together. Mayfield actuallybecame part of Palo Alto in 1938 or so, but Mountain View was separate,Sunnyvale was separate. Menlo Park was next door, but then Atherton was allbig estates. It was a lot of green around here and not so many houses andalmost no significant business structures other than the Hendy Iron Works andsome industrial-type stuff. But it was orchards—orchards all over the place. Iremember how exciting it was as a kid to go up in the springtime and ride ourbicycles up in the hills and look out at the Santa Clara Valley. It was white—the prune and apricot trees. Even high school kids went up to look at it. Orbefore even high school. So the geography in the early sixties had changed alot from what I’m telling you about as a kid, but it was still distinct towns, notjust one megalopolis or megopolis, whatever the word is. It runs pretty muchfrom San Francisco to San Jose now. But as far as the venture business goes, the SBICs were, as I say, I’m prettysure twelve is the approximate number if not the exact—that was the numberof people who came to these dinners. It was characterized by the fact that youcould get in any deal by calling. If you heard about a deal, you could callanybody up, and they’d let you in if you wanted to or were interested. Or ifyou were doing a deal, you typically asked another firm or two to participatewith you—not always, but if someone had called. It was not as competitive oras difficult to get into deals that you heard about but weren’t ones youoriginated. Bill and I believed in being cooperative and working hard on thethings, so if we were in somebody else’s deal we did more than our share ofthe work. I can’t tell you the number of deals we did, but we put up our money, our$150,[000]. We borrowed the $150,[000] from the debenture basis and thenwe were limited to $60,000 per investment, which was one fifth of $300,000,which was our capital, half of which was provided by the government itself ona different basis. So first of all, the landscape was very little money lookingfor very few deals—just the opposite of what some people say it is now. But Draper, Gaither & Anderson was in full-fledge running. It was a partnership instructure a lot like a modern venture partnership, with limited partners.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, now was that a new idea? The limited partnership? Johnson: They started in ’58. The idea of a limited partnership, of course, was not new.It’s just a form of business that evolved a long time ago. But for doinginvestment firms as limited partnerships, I doubt it was new. I thinkinvestment firms and non-venture firms were structured that way back East,I’m sure, for a long time before that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: We talked at the beginning about the well-to-do families, the Rockefellers andthe Whitneys. Has venture capital or whatever you’re calling this industrynow on the East Coast evolved so that their big companies may have a venturecapital branch? Johnson: No. That’s something lately. In the West it was a few SBICs and one publicSBIC based in San Diego which was a pretty good size and then Draper,Gaither & Anderson, which was a private limited partner structure with abunch of general partners and a bunch of associates, which was a trainingground for many modern players, including Pete Bancroft, I might add. Thenback East you had AR&D [American Research and Development]. The dealthat was going in Boston then, you had the Rockefeller family and associatesin New York, and the Whitneys, and then there’s a company called BessemerSecurities—the capital came from the development of the Bessemer Furnace,which was a predecessor of the open-hearth furnace that I worked on, and thatfamily’s called Phipps. They had the Bessemer Securities, still in existence,which ran some of their family assets and put a lot of that into venture capital.And there were other families I can’t name, but I know there were.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: The banks didn’t have a venture capital branch? Johnson: Banks, no—they got going pretty soon. I’d have to look at my chart to findout and tell you when. The Bank of America, then a different bird than it isnow, local-oriented company of the Gianninis started a venture capital firm. Idon’t think it was an SBIC. Then Hale Brothers, Prentiss Hale, started an earlyfirm called Western Business Assistance which was an SBIC. But it wasn’tHale Brothers, a branch of the retailing group. The Hale family hired a veryextraordinary man called H.D. Thoreau, [Jr.] to run that for them. And he didwell with it, and some others. I don’t remember the amount of capital inDraper, Gaither & Anderson, but it started off with about $5 million. So it[million] at that point.  So there were deals around. Bill and I tried to figure out where things weregoing, and so we thought of lasers as one area that something might be going.We thought of different technologies, but mostly we just sort of sniffedaround. One thing we did that was almost amusing—there were two streets inPalo Alto called Commercial and Industrial. Entrepreneurs were beginning tostart companies on their own, and so we used to go down Commercial. We didone time, literally, go down there in our car and walk along, knock on thedoors and say, “Want any money today?” kind of thing. It was reallyinteresting because people would almost never wouldn’t ask you in. It wasn’tlike knocking on a home asking if you want to buy any brushes—they wereinterested in talking about it even if they didn’t want any money. We didn’tquite say it in those terms. We said, “We’re venture capitalists and we’veheard about your company.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you were calling yourselves venture capitalists? Johnson: Yes, we did—we called it Draper and Johnson Investment Company. I wasthe vice president, Bill was the president, and we set up our office at 780Welch Road—that’s over by the Stanford Hospital. We just started upsometime in September of ’62, opened our office, and we just had to finddeals. We talked to people. I think the first thing we did was called sitronic,which is two companies, actually, that did some electronic packaging andsomething called checkwares weighers. When you weigh packaged goods,you have to run them across a scale to see if they’re underweight or not. JoeJulie was the entrepreneur and so we did that deal.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, and this was just by nosing around? Johnson: Nosing around. Bill had been here since 1958, so he knew people. I didn’tknow anything other than I fancied myself as somebody who knewtechnology and understood physics and that sort of stuff.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It sounds to me as though you had a pretty good start. Johnson: Well, Bill was Mr. Outside. He’s always been good at that, and I was Mr.Inside. I don’t want to imply that I did more analysis than Bill did. I remembergoing on a PSA flight to L.A. for something or other. So Bill and I weresitting there together, and the stewardesses are all over Bill, and I could hardlyget my lunch! [laughter] Bill’s really good at that. I don’t mean at flirting withthe girls, I just meant he’s a very externally-oriented guy and very good at it, Imight add. Bill goes in a room, and by the time a half hour’s up, he knowseverybody in the room. I’m still talking to somebody in the corner. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you know that about him? Johnson: Well, I knew he was outward-directed. I knew, as a salesman he’s not exactlyshy. But I knew that, yes, and it was very helpful for us because he opened alot of doors and knew people. He was careful about not overusing his Draper,Gaither contacts, but we did some deals. I don’t remember if we did a dealwith them or not. We did several deals. Another one was Behavioral ResearchLaboratories, which was a programmed learning company which would havebeen computerized ten years later. We did a deal that mixed water at a dam. Ifthey want to get the right temperature of the water coming out they have to—The water higher is hotter and the water lower is colder, so we had a productto mix the water to get a certain temperature. It was a control system. I can’tname them all, but there were several deals.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: In each of these cases, were you pulling upon this group of SBIC executivesto chip in to the deals? Johnson: No. Not at all. It wasn’t like modern-day angels where they have a dinner andeverybody decides to throw in a few bucks and back it. No, we didn’t reallytalk about deals so much. We’d have dinner and we’d talk about the business,where it was going, dealing with the government. The SBA’s pretty good, butthere were a lot of forms and bureaucracy that you had to deal with, and wetalked about that. But we did talk about deals. Somebody would say they’redoing this, they’re doing that. We’d talk about where things were going. Halfof them weren’t even interested in technology deals anyway. They wereinterested in real estate and that sort of stuff. So the only reason I mentionedthe twelve is, I think that probably represented most of or a lot of the venturecapitalists that were SBICs. There were others doing it, but the only one Ireally know of, other than individuals, some of which are shown on our chartwere—Ed Heller was an individual doing it at the time—was Draper, Gaither& Anderson.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was there the term angels at that time? Johnson: No. The word wasn’t used. Because we were all small, we were doing brandnew startups a lot of the time, but not always. We did startups and we diddeals that were already underway. The idea of angels only took place muchlater, when individuals were backing companies to get them going. Probablynot fair, but I always think of angels as putting money in and seeing whathappens. I’m sure I could be criticized for saying that. Venture capitalistsunderstand their job is to put money in the company and work with thecompany. So I always think of it as capital, consulting, and commitment,because entrepreneurs are very driven men and women, and they want someone who understands the competitive and athletic zeal that they have.That’s a lot of the success. It isn’t only thinking your way through things anddoing them right. You don’t have to be an athlete, of course, you just have tohave athletic attitudes about winning. This is as important to manyentrepreneurs as making money. That’s not always true, because it comes withit. Without the money they wouldn’t do it, but without the competitive zealthey wouldn’t make it. So it’s kind of a combination.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: This idea of working with a company, working with the entrepreneur to builda company. Was that a new concept? It’s not just a matter of putting yourmoney in and seeing what happens. Johnson: It wasn’t really, because all I really know is a lot of it has to do historicallywith the book The Visible Hand. You can’t start a steel mill small, you can’tstart an oil company small. People did make deals, people did invest, andpeople did guide companies. But I don’t know much about the twenties andthirties—the thirties, not much was going on anyway, people were trying tofeed their kids. But the twenties was boom times and a number of companieswere started. I think they probably had people rather than institutions thatbacked companies. There always were investment banks that were raising money for companies,but they were mostly not, I don’t think, for new companies. But I know in theformation of U.S. Steel, they brought together Carnegie Steel, and I think theHenry Frick Coke Works—the Frick Companies, to form U.S. Steel. So thosewere two existing companies that were brought together along with capitalfrom J.P. Morgan. That’s big-time stuff, though, that’s not entrepreneurialcapital. But it was what was going on in those eras, and I’m sure without evenchecking it out there were dozens, many hundreds of small firms started.There are some still in existence that started back in the twenties, backed byflush times and individual backers who backed entrepreneurs and they builtcompanies. But the idea of angels—I’d never even heard of angels ‘til about twenty yearsago. And that’s recent times.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But that is an interesting distinction, isn’t it? Both are financing, in manycases, startup companies. But a venture capitalist—and you should be sayingthis, not me—has a sustained role with the company that is being financed;that it’s just not a matter of putting money in and letting it go. Johnson: Well, I’d better be careful that it isn’t just a venture capital conceit. Someangels are organized into groups. I don’t know if they call the lead one anarchangel or not, but they have leaders of these groups, and I think they follow through. I think most angels are successful, operating businessmen who’vemade quite a bit of money, or women, and they put money into youngcompanies. I can’t imagine they just leave them alone. We’ve got five guyshere [at Asset Management Company] plus me, all of whom work hard on thecompanies we invest in. We’re not unusual, we’re usual, actually. We do,heavily, startups or very young companies. Other firms that are bigger, theytend to do much later stage because they’ve got to put more money to work.So we’re not worried about getting money to work, we’re about finding thingsappropriate for our size. But anyway, getting back to your original question, the landscape was veryuncompetitive, very few people. In some ways, from the entrepreneur’s pointof view, it wasn’t competitive. They were dealing with a cartel, not a spokencartel or even a written cartel, but just that they didn’t have any way to goshopping deals, because it was one monolithic—not quite monolithic—groupof investors that they were dealing with. But we did talk to each other a lot and share deals and of course bargaintogether on things.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So the companies that you mentioned a few minutes back had several venturecapitalists backing them? Johnson: No. The Illumitronics was one we did by ourselves, although my own dad puta little bit and Bill’s dad put a little bit in alongside, so it was only us.Behavioral Research Laboratories was two or three investors. I don’tremember who. I think the others were individuals, by the way, not firms.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh really. Johnson: Yes. The deal that we did with the balancing the water, which didn’t reallysucceed, was a couple three firms. So it was a mix. It was the very first year. Ithink January 2, 1963 was when we closed our first deal, having gone inbusiness in September. And then on May 2, ’63, I remember that because itwas my birthday, we closed the Behavioral Research Labs, and that was oursecond deal. So we were not racing out with money. We did a deal in threemonths and then five months later we did another deal. And then in 1963 weprobably did one or two more. Then—I could look them up, but I can’t—wedid about six or seven.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What was your state of mind?  Johnson: Well, my state of mind was this is fun but I’d rather be a player than a coach.So I began to realize that what I really wanted to do, even though I likedworking with Bill and he’s an excellent guy to be a partner with—I wanted tobuy a company and run it myself. So that was in the back of my mindalthough I liked working with these guys and helping them. I figured, gee, ifI’m going to help them this much, I might as well run one! So in 1965, SutterHill offered us a very good price for our portfolio. I thought, here’s mychance, because Bill could go over and be the major—along with Paul [M.]Wythes—the major figure in Sutter Hill, which was a real estate company thatwas getting into venture capital at that point. They wanted our portfolio togive them a good start, although I think they had an SBIC also, by the way.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And so Paul Wythes was there? Johnson: Paul Wythes was already there. We have a lot of fun kidding Paul about whofounded Sutter Hill. After we sold our portfolio to them, then Bill joinedSutter Hill. He and Paul ran Sutter Hill, and they did a great job as we allknow now. I had a few hundred thousand bucks for the first time in my life, and I wastrying to find the company to buy. And I looked around a bit. I ran into a littlebiotech instrumentation company up in Berkeley and I did that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What was it called? Johnson: Chromatronix. And it had valves and fittings to use in chemistry andbiochemistry.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So this is mid-sixties that you’re doing that? Johnson: It is exactly ’65. And so one thing that happened that turned out to beimportant later, because I was here and I had been a student in good standingwhen I left Stanford, I was able—you can enroll in courses later. I didn’tknow anything about molecular biology, so I took a course in molecularbiology in 1964, or something, and met some really good scientists—it wasn’tmeeting them personally. But I heard about DNA and making proteins fromthe DNA and RNA process, and it opened my eyes to the fact that that couldbe a very important area.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: As early as the mid-sixties?  Johnson: That was 1964 I took that course.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That’s before recombinant DNA. Recombinant DNA doesn’t come alonguntil ’72-’73. Johnson: Could I have taken that course after? I thought I took it when Bill and I weretogether. I’ll look it up. The first course I took over at Stanford was calledpartial differential equations—that interested me because I never did get itright in school—never did get it right, actually! Then I took a course incomputers, the beginning computer course. Maybe that was when I was withBill.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I bet. Johnson: Yes, and then a little later I went back and took the molecular biology course.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: From my knowledge of the history, that makes more sense. Johnson: I took three courses there, because neither this computer [science] nor thattype of genetics were in school when I was there. When did Watson and Crickpublish?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: 1953. but that was the discovery of the structure of DNA. How to geneticallyengineer, how to manipulate DNA, came in the early ‘70s. Johnson: Well, then I think that’s too late, because Amgen was founded in 1980 andGenentech had to have been founded about 1975 or 6.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Seventy-six. Johnson: Yes. I think the ability to have a course about the structure of DNA occurredbefore that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh it could have. The science of DNA— Johnson: —they didn’t talk about how you’d manipulate it. I think they just talkedabout the Watson-Crick discoveries, and [Paul] Berg and [Arthur] Kornbergand [David] Korn came to our class and talked. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh did they really! Johnson: And Hogness talked. I think they talked about what you might do, but it sureopened my eyes. I remember working in the lab there, and we would findstrains of bacteria that could thrive in tryptophan. But the idea that you takeorganisms which were not human and insert genes into them—we didn’t do it,but the idea you could do it was certainly part of that course. So I can find outquickly when that was, but I’m going to take a guess it was 1964.After we sold out to Sutter Hill and Bill went there, then I set up an office inmy home and worked there. Well, that’s for a later meeting, I think. But Ithink that course in computers probably opened my eyes to lots of things,especially that one. I wouldn’t have gotten involved in Amgen, I don’t think,which was very important to me without that and that was 1980. I rememberthat date very well.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What got you interested in taking the molecular biology course was thisinvestment in the Chromatronix? Johnson: No, no. I think I did Chromatronix after that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Then, what moved you? Johnson: The fact that I had empty spots in my education.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. Johnson: Computers didn’t exist when I was in school. Partial differential equationsdid, but that was a separate issue. And then, molecular biology did not exist,but I was aware of it. I read the magazines and popular press. Sometimes Iread something like Science or something like that. I’m sure what themotivation was—there are things going on I don’t know about, and I want toknow about computers, and I want to know about modern biology.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Ultimately with the idea of maybe this is going to lead to a new area ofinvestment? Johnson: Yes, that’s true, but I’ve always had this, maybe not healthy, conflict betweenwhat interests me just for the hell of it, and what might lead to business. Ithink it’s been basically good, because I think the course in molecular  30biology—I knew in general, without being specific about it, that taking thatcourse would fill me in, fill a big gap in my knowledge that I didn’t have. I’msure in the back of my mind I was thinking, well, maybe this’ll lead tosomething someday, or maybe it’s just something exciting going on I need toknow about. And the same thing was true of the computer course. That wasmuch more obviously of commercial use.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: The fact that molecular biology would become a commercial gold mine was inthe future. Johnson: Yes, that’s right. I remember talking to those guys that gave the course aboutwhen can this done? When could this possibly be done for human beings?They said, “A long way off.” I remember that part, and I remember a guytalking at one of these local service clubs speaking to it. I happened to go to it.I asked him that question, and he said, “This is really theoretical stuff, butsome day we’ll be inserting genes into non-human organisms to make humanproteins.” But he said, “Some day.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that course team taught by the Department of Biochemistry? Johnson: No, it was taught by a guy named Dow [O.] Woodward, who was a youngbiology professor and, by that time, Don[ald] Kennedy, who much laterbecame president [of Stanford], who was a biology professor and was a friendof mine. So we were talking about these issues as well. But Dow Woodwardinvited these leading guys on the front end of the research to speak in hisclass. But it was just fantastic for the undergraduates, which was most of thecourse, plus an old undergraduate taking an undergraduate course. They usedto call it graduate at large, which I thought was a rather funny title.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, you were in one of the hotbeds of molecular biology at the time. Johnson: I didn’t know it, though! [laughter] But without that course, I might have gotinvolved anyway. Probably in another interview we’ll talk about BrookByers’s time with me and how that worked out. I remember talking to Brookearly on in 1972 when he first came with me, “We’ve got to stay alert to this.This is going to be some big deal.” His roommate at that time was BobSwanson.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I know that! Johnson: [chuckling] Why we didn’t get involved—that’s a little later than what we’retalking about right now unless you want to leap to that. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, Genentech was founded in1976. And we’re still talking about the midsixties. Johnson: Mid-sixties. So one thing in that decade—people began to wake up to venturecapital. There were some successful things in the late-sixties—this dates backto my father-in-law. He had died by then, but I said to my mother-in-law, I’dlike to meet Laurance Rockefeller. I don’t do much of this in my life, but Isure did that time. She said, “Well, I’ll give him a call.” So the next time I wasin New York, I forget why, maybe just a family visit, Laurance Rockefellerwas nice enough to see me. It was about 4:30, and I said, “Well, gee, I reallyappreciate all the time you’ve given me.” He was telling about how theirfamily got going in venture capital and the deals they’d done. They had anoffice then called the Rockefeller Family and Associates. I said, “Well, thank you very much.” He said, “Well, what’s your hurry?”[chuckling] I said, “Well, I think this half hour is a lot of your time.” He said,“I’d like [you] to meet some of our people.” So he took me and introduced meto Ted [H.] McCourtney and Peter [O.] Crisp and some other guys, and a guynamed Charlie [Charles B.] Smith. The important thing was I met these guys there, and so I did some deals withthem after that. The first one was called Coherent Radiation then. It was alaser company, which I was sort of alert to from having—I didn’t take acourse in it, but I did learn some things about it back in the early sixties. Thenthere’s another deal we did called BioSurface Technolog[ies], whichdeveloped ways of growing patches of your own skin, patches of yourcartilage. We sold that to Genzyme and the products are on the market now.So that was two Rockefeller-related deals that I did do.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And that was through Draper and Johnson? Johnson: No, that was after Draper and Johnson. Draper and Johnson was sold and wepaid off our government debt and we had some money left over. I forget, twoor three hundred thousand bucks that I had then, never having had any capital,that I was going to buy a company [with]. It was like those ads for whiskey,you took one sip and then you took another sip and pretty soon you know. ButI got going on my own, didn’t have anybody working [for me]. I didn’t hireBrook [Byers] until 1972, so this whole period from ’65 to ’72 I was just onmy own. We moved to Palo Alto in ’68 from Atherton where we’d been living, and Iset up an office and a woman came in every morning who was my assistantand helped me do things, set up a card table, actually. I didn’t see a company Ireally wanted to buy, but I did see deals, because I was in the swim by then. People were calling me, and Hale Brothers Associates, that I told you aboutearlier, they were looking at Chromatronix, so we did that together. That wasa very early company—later on invented some of the first manual analysis ofprotein—sequenators they’re called. They take proteins and break them downto the amino acids, and later on had a way of assembling proteins, and in alaborious inefficient way assembling nucleic acids.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That early! Johnson: That early—in the mid-late sixties. Another thing, we had a young assistantprofessor at Caltech who was our advisor called Lee Hood. [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh yes. [chuckling] Johnson: But later on Mike [Michael W.] Hunkapiller, then later on, much later we dida deal called Applied Biosystems. I did it in our family partnership which weformed a little bit after that. So that’s how I got involved with Lee. AppliedBiosystems didn’t take the technology from Chromatronix, but Chromatronixpioneered, in a very manual early way of tacking nucleic acids together toform short genes—it was just amazing.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, and that was the ultimate goal? To create artificial genes? Johnson: The ultimate goal of that company was to make equipment to be used in—When I invested in it, and a guy named Dick Gundelfinger— It wasinteresting being in Berkeley in the early seventies and late sixties, because Iwent into the lab one time and everybody was wearing conical peasant-typehats and they were flying the American flag upside down. I couldn’t stand it. Itook the flag down, I put it right side up. And they said, “You’re a fascist.” Isaid, “No. As long as I’m chairman of the board, we’re not flying theAmerican flag upside down.” It was an anti-Vietnam [protest]. I said, “Youcan wear any damn hats you want to and you can say what you want, butwe’re not going to—.” They thought of me as this incredible right winger.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You’ve got to fly the flag right. Johnson: You’re not going to disgrace our flag. It was a symbol of distress. I said,“You’re not in distress.” They said, “But the country is.” It was a greatBerkeley argument is what it was. Gundelfinger had a pretty good kid, ascientist, who was leading that little demonstration. I was in a big argumentwith the president, and I just said, “I can’t stand it. I’m not going to have it.” Ididn’t have the power to do much about it really except make noise. But that was a distraction. That was one day, one visit. But basically they were tryingto make what they called low dead-volume valves and then pulseless pumps.And they made chromatography systems. That was [what] the company’sbusiness was. This was just something that Dick did using Lee Hood’s advice,I think. I don’t think they really sold them. It wasn’t the business. And thenSpectra-Physics bought it from us. They wanted to get in that business, andthey had been our rival in the laser business from Coherent, so I knew them.They bought the company and didn’t do much with it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Does Moshe Alafi figure in any of this? Johnson: Yes, Moshe became a good friend. He was part of Physics International whichdeveloped the physics that brought the halves of the A-bomb together. I metsome of his colleagues in that, and we did a couple of investments together.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Wasn’t he was operating kind of the way you were? Johnson: He did, yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: As a pretty independent agent. Johnson: Yes, in those days and still, really, I’m different from other venture funds, youknow. We don’t have a lot of outside investors.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh is that so? Johnson: We’re just my wife and my kids and Asset Management Partners. Then weformed a new fund in ’04, and several of our families that knew us asked ifthey could be involved. Of course, we wanted to get a little more capital so wedid that, and one Indian tribe. This is very modern history. One Indian tribecame in, suggested by some Asian Indian friends. It’s a very interesting tribeback in Colorado called the South Utes. But that’s ’04, that’s modern.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, we haven’t gotten there yet. Johnson: We haven’t got there yet.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But just to recapitulate, essentially it’s always been family money?  Johnson: Yes. I’ll go through that history. It’s pretty easy. I didn’t have any money.Iborrowed money from my father-in-law who made it available on his deathbed, basically, after having promised it. I never had enough capital to talkabout doing anything on my own. But I forget the number, let’s say$350,[000], something along in there, after we sold our portfolio and then paidoff our debts to the government. Then I took a trip to South America. In 1965 Cathie and I went and lookedaround. Her grandparents came from Argentina, so we went down and visitedthe distant cousins, second cousins of hers. They were Americans, but theyhad moved down there after the Civil War. Her grandfather came back, but alot of them stayed down there. So we had a visit with them, and we went toVenezuela and Chile and Brazil, had a good visit. But anyway, I was goneabout two months. I had bought some—I forget what stocks I bought, I think it was some localcompany that did very well while I was gone, so I had another 100,000 bucksbeyond what I started with, so that helped too. So then—then I began lookingfor a company to buy and that’s when I found Chromatronix and Coherent andthat’s when I went to see Laurance Rockefeller. I don’t think I’d have doneCoherent—Chromatronix I would have done without, but I think thatconnection through Mrs. Holman got me involved with their office and we didtwo or three deals together. Two I can name for sure. But basically I was on my own and invested that capital. I don’t remember theexact time, but about 1970 I formed a family SBIC, another one, called AssetManagement Capital Company. We liquidated that eventually, paid off thegovernment and formed Asset Management Partners, back about, oh whenBrook was there, actually, between ’72 and ’77. I’m rambling along now, but I think that key area I established myself on myown occurred starting in 1965, having had a little capital for the first time inmy life. It was a good feeling, actually. And so I did deals, and I had prettygood results from them, got very interested in biotechnology. Chromatronixwas the first of the biotech-oriented deals. And then Bill [William K.] Bowes,[Jr.]—do you want to go on with that now?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: No, let’s not start on Amgen yet. Johnson: Okay. That’s a long story.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, let’s save that for next time. Have you said enough about Moshe?  Johnson: Oh no. So I got to know Moshe very well. I’m trying to think of the deals wedid together, but I’m pretty sure Chromatronix—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, he was a principal in Cetus. Johnson: In Cetus, but I did not do Cetus.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you have a chance to do Cetus? Johnson: No. I didn’t hear about it. I think Bill Bowes did though.And I think Mosheand I talked more than we did, but I’m practically sure he was part ofChromatronix. I knew him well, saw him a lot. He has a fine son called Chris,who’s a good guy.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, he has gone into venture capital, too. Johnson: Yes, I know he has. We talked a lot about physics; we talked about lots ofstuff. We were always friendly, and I admire and like Moshe. He was born inIraq, by the way. The answer is I know him well and we did a deal or twotogether and Chromatronix was one, but I don’t remember the other one. He’sa good man; he’s got good judgment about science, and he works hard.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why don’t we stop with your assessment of what the SBIC program meant toventure capital, or what was to come. Johnson: Well, first of all, it was a good concept. It was a result of good, bipartisanwork in Congress. People thinking, for once, what’s good for the country?What do we need? And people agreed that we needed some kind of a systemso people could start their own businesses, and I could see why that wouldappeal to both sides of the House. If we just kept on like we were going, therewould be nothing but big companies, and people working in big companies,not what the Congress, speaking for all of us, wanted. The first group of SBICs, they didn’t really have the rules right, and there wasquite a bit of self-serving. There were people lending money to their in-lawsand all that kind of stuff, and so they cleaned up. I will say this, the SBA is apretty good outfit. They’re run pretty well, and it was then, and as far as Iknow it’s run pretty well now. So it’s not one of those government agenciesyou throw up your hands and say, “Good God.” But once they cleaned it up,then they were more strict about who was getting licenses. Bill and I were inthe very first group with the Small Business Investment Act of ’58 that created SBICs. We formed it in ’61 and then actually started business in ’62,so we weren’t in the first generation. I don’t remember whether they hadcleaned it up by then or not, but we qualified and got our license. Looking back on it, it resulted in two major things. The first one was it createdan environment and a system so that people thought that having anentrepreneurial society was a good thing. This is a very general topic, but theidea that our nation wanted entrepreneurs, our nation wanted people to be ableto start businesses and grow them, and it’s very hard to do that with bootstrapsonly, especially in technology. The second thing that happened was anaccident. It created a cadre of people, of which Bill Draper and I are twomembers, who entered the venture capital business that way, and later on wentinto the present-day venture capital business which is entirely private. But ofthe two—they’re both important, because the venture capital business is animportant part of the entrepreneurial system. Without venture capital, somecompanies would get going, but many would not. And many would not beable to grow because they wouldn’t get growth capital. So I would say that you couldn’t argue that the SBIC program was not asuccess. It was a success because much of the flavor of America now isentrepreneurship, is about people starting companies, trying to make money,and trying to have that kind of success that comes with people who want to beindependent and build their own lives. It’s not just money—a lot of it’smoney—you couldn’t take the money out of it, but you couldn’t take the spiritout of it either. So that’s what the SBIC program gave us, and the taxpayers,as far as I know, it didn’t cost much. They got their money back. The loansthat were lent—we borrowed money from the government in those days. Lateron they changed it to guaranteeing bank loans. Now the government— I don’teven understand it now—but it gets part of the profits. The program is stillgoing, but one or two people can’t do it now. You’ve got to have a group, Ithink it is, to do it. And I haven’t really checked it out. Bill Draper kept one inexistence for a long time. I don’t know if he still has it or not, but as far as theoriginal SBIC, those two things are what made it successful and it did work.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: A good place to stop, I think, for today.  Johnson: You just ask me a question. You let me know.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, I will ask you a question. Well, last time, Mr. Johnson— Johnson: Won’t you call me Pitch?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, all right. I wanted to be formal on tape. [chuckling] Johnson: No, no. Be normal. Mr. Johnson is my father, actually.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All right, Pitch. We went through your early history, and you introducedBrook Byers, but we didn’t get much further than that. So maybe you couldpick up on that part of the history. Johnson: Sure. Well, I can’t give you the exact year I met Brook, but it was about 1971.I had been operating by myself. I worked in my own house, and my assistant,a woman, came in every day and set up a card table and answered the phoneand took care of things. The workload got pretty heavy, and I wanted to havean assistant, somebody to work with me. I was a private investor; I had a littlefamily partnership, and I did things just privately, although I had a familySBIC as well, which gave some leverage. What I can’t remember is who first mentioned Brook to me. He had workedfor one of our portfolio companies. I’m sure it was Allen [D.] Calvin who wasrunning that company called Behavioral Research Laboratories. But Brookhad moved on to another job at that point, but Allen said that I should talk toBrook, it would be good. Brook, as I learned later, was a Georgia Techengineer and a Stanford MBA, and so had some breadth of education that Iliked. So we met a couple of times and, after talking to a couple of referencesthat knew him, I decided he would be very good at our business. What a gooddecision that was! [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right! Were you calling yourself a venture capitalist at that point? Johnson: That’s right. I was calling myself a venture capitalist ever since 1962 whenBill Draper and I started Draper and Johnson Investment Company, which wehave covered. And then, in 1965 we sold our portfolio to Sutter Hill. Bill went with Sutter Hill, and then I went on my own as an individual and with afamily SBIC and a family partnership from ’65 on. I hired Brook in 1972. Hecame to work, we bought the house next door where we could work, so he hadhis own office. We worked together, and we looked at a lot of deals. Iremember the first one that Brook did, I would say, most of the work on or alot of the work on, was called Tandem Computers. Tom Perkins, whom I’dknown long before that, had founded it within Kleiner & Perkins, and hewanted an outside investor to validate the deal to other investors. So Brookchecked it out, went down and visited with Jim Treybig and did a fine job, andso we did invest in it and it worked out very nicely. It is, incidentally, how hemet Tom Perkins.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I looked at the videotape with all of you at the panel at the Computer HistoryMuseum. Johnson: Yes, about five year ago.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I remember Tom Perkins saying that first fund, which of course supportedTandem and Genentech and others, which did not do as well, was the largestfund in the world at that point. Johnson: At $6 million?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: At $8 million. Johnson: Eight million, Yes. It was. Well, Tom had to engage an investment banker toraise the money, actually, but it did well. Although I went on the board ofTandem, and I certainly participated in the check on them, Brook did a finejob of chasing down all the alleys and figuring out about the people, lookingat the marketplace, evaluating the technology.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Had you shown him how to do that? Johnson: Well, yes, I showed him some things. On one hand, he denies thisnowadays—I sort of threw him in the pool and let him swim. He could swim.On the other hand, he’d come back, we’d talk over—I think by questions andby asking him what things he’d found out. It wasn’t like, do this with yourright hand, do this with your left hand. But we need to know these things. AndI think there was some of that. He gives me a lot of credit nowadays for thoseyears of being his mentor. As a matter of fact, in just the last few weeks wedid an interview and a series of photographs for a magazine whose name Idon’t know—it was a book about mentoring. He did me the great compliment of naming me his mentor, so we had a bunch of pictures. It’s one of thosethings where they take a hundred pictures, they’ll use one.But anyway, I didn’t do active mentoring, like sitting him down and lecturinghim sort of thing. We worked together, I asked the questions, and in the endhe watched the process, in my case, of making the decision about investing inTandem which was a very good decision. I went on the board and it workedout great as you know—as the world knows, not about my involvement butabout Tandem. In fact, I still have some HP stock as a result of Tandem goinginto Compaq, going into HP in a very noisy merger of about five years ago. Brook was a very hard worker. He worked a lot—not endlessly, but he reallyapplied himself to his job, and he understood technology from his engineeringtraining at a very fine engineering school, Georgia Tech, so that thetechnology issues were well within his grasp. He had a good sense of businessand people. He liked Jimmy Treybig; he liked the team of people at Tandem,and so he sized them up pretty well. I went down there, obviously, myself atime or two. I don’t remember exactly when that was, but it was fairly shortlyafter we got going, let’s say a year or two. We looked at lots of deals, turned down a lot of deals. But I think Brook’stechnical judgment, his judgment about people, and he has a very winningattitude. I think he was a high school half-miler, or something. Even though hewasn’t a college athlete that I know of, he has an athletic mentality aboutwinning and succeeding. He has that kind of drive that goes with successfulentrepreneurs and venture capitalists. I can’t remember all the deals we did.We did several others, Tandem being the outstanding one. After the end offive years Tom was expanding his organization so Brook said to me, “Whydon’t we form a partnership.” I said, “I’ll have to adopt you because it’s afamily partnership.” So he left with my good wishes and went with Tom in1977. I remember that pretty well. So it was a very good time, successful, wehad a good relationship—still do for that matter. He was actually Bob Swanson’s roommate during a lot of that time. They bothupgraded their roommates a lot! [laughter] So one reason we didn’t doGenentech was interesting. I had taken a course in molecular biology atStanford in the sixties, so I was sort of alert to the potential of it likeoftentimes a course or two or a professor influences you. So when I heard thatSwanson was starting to plan a biotech company that would do geneticengineering, I got quite interested. Swanson in their apartment was being quiteclosemouthed about what he was doing—as he should have been—so Brooksaid, “You know it would really make me sort of uncomfortable if we werebargaining with him and trying to get in his deal.” I said, “Well, all right.” Butwithout that I would have never gotten involved in Amgen. So things turn outsometimes for their own reasons. Brook and Bob were quite close friends.  40<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you think that Swanson can be credited with getting Brook interested inthe biological side of technology? Johnson: I can’t credit him, but I don’t doubt it. I’m sure they talked about it. I’m sureas roommates they had a beer and talked about stuff like that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, I think they were talking a lot. Johnson: He was very well aware of the process of forming [Genentech]. But of coursewe looked at other technology deals—one was maturing at that point, calledChromatronix, which was a deal that made high-precision gear forchromatography as well as build a very early protein sequenator, and theneven made a machine that manually could assemble nucleic acids into shortoligonucleotides. But that was very primitive, and that became the samethings we eventually did in Applied Biosystems, but we didn’t do that until1980. Brook had been gone three years by the time I did Amgen and AppliedBiosystems.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So was that sequenator a predecessor of what came from Lee Hoodeventually? Johnson: Oh yes. Lee Hood was an assistant professor then, just a young guy, and hewas advisor to Chromatronix which was in Berkeley. It was very much aBerkeley company. They were great young men that worked in that lab—theywere just good Berkeley radical-type of guys. And I say “good” now becausethe whole thing was kind of funny, and they were fine technicians. Dick Gundelfinger, the president, was a good solid guy—also a Berkeleyite inattitudes and so forth, but he worked pretty hard. Finally after quite a while wemerged it with Spectra-Physics, but I made a lot of relationships for thembecause I was the only guy who had a coat and tie, so I had to go and do boothduty in some of the conventions. It was really very primitive in terms ofventure capital. I also went back East and signed up Ken Reynan to be ourrep. Ken Reynan turned out to be a pretty good factor in the related businesseslater.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you in any way unusual in looking at the biology-based technologies atthis point? Johnson: Well, when I was in school there wasn’t any computer. I graduated in 1950from Stanford, in ’52 from Harvard Business School. So it was pretty noncomputer—there really weren’t many computers although there were some primitive ones. And genetic engineering, while I’m sure DNA was discoveredalong in those times, I really felt I needed to take a computer course, which Idid take at Stanford, and I took this molecular biology course taught by a guynamed Dow Woodward. It’s just amazing. It isn’t amazing—we all knoweducation makes a huge difference. One course changed my life, basically.Because I don’t know that I would have been so alert to Genentech or thewhole area or especially to Amgen when it came along or to AppliedBiosystems, which was formed the same year. But I’m sure my interest inbiotechnology—I’ve done a whole series of good biotech companies overtime—Chromatronix, Applied Biosystems, Amgen, Hybritech, and IDEC[Pharmaceuticals], and now one that I hope is going to be a great companycalled Novocell in the stem cell area. But I will have had over twenty yearssome terrific firms, and I don’t think I would have started down that pathwayif it hadn’t been for that course I took at Stanford. If you graduate from Stanford, then you can reenroll in undergraduatecourses—they call you a graduate at large, which my wife found an amusingstatement, seeing all the good looking young girls were in the classes. I tookthree. I took one course just for the heck of it, which did not have anyapplication that I could think of and didn’t turn out to be—in partialdifferential equations, because I never had covered that in my undergraduatedays. It just interested me. But the other two were definitely trying to broadenmy education to cover things that weren’t there when I was in school.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Which leads me to one of the questions that I had in mind: how important is itin considering an investment to know something about the technology? Johnson: Well, for me it is because I like science and technology. Even in high school,and all that stuff, I just ate up the courses. I loved them, did pretty well, notalways the top student, but I’ve just been fascinated by understanding the waythings happen. So my interest in technology—I’m enough of a businessman tothink about the economic side of it, but I find it stimulating, even now, to goand talk to some guy about something he’s doing in his lab that is novel or canbe of great use to people. And I’m not alone, a lot of venture capitalists are like this. We really like thetechnology. I’m not saying we can perform it in the lab, but we canunderstand it at a level, but that’s not the same. So actually, venture capitalistsget good at discussing things with a knowledgeable air about them. [laughter].But I delight a lot in technology, and I probably spend more time than wouldbe the most absolutely businesslike use of my time—but who cares. It excitesme! So I had great fun in the early days of Amgen, talking to George [B.]Rathmann, whom we brought in as president. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, start back further than that if you don’t mind, because my understandingis that George Rathmann really wasn’t the beginning of the story. Johnson: He was not at the beginning. The Amgen story is something like this. I’llprobably miss a name or two but— Bill Bowes was not with U.S. VenturePartners at that point; he was an independent private venture capitalist havingbeen with Blyth & Company for years. I think by then he’d left Blyth, or atleast he was making deals on his own. He had a guy he was co-investing withcalled Sam Alstetter, and if I have the story straight, and I may not, SamAlstetter was on an airplane and met a guy who was a Stanford professor—hisname is not coming to me right now.But anyway, this guy talked to Sam about starting a company that would takeadvantage of the developments in genetic engineering to form a biotechcompany. Sam told Bill about it. Actually Sam and Bill formed a corporationin about May of 1980 called Applied Molecular Genetics. Bill Bowes had alsocreated two other— You know how artists have a blue period? He had anapplied period. He named Applied Biosystems, which started off as part ofAmgen, actually, and then Applied Microcircuits, which I got involved withvery early on as a non-healthcare deal. So those were three deals called“applied”, all started out of the fertile mind of Bill Bowes, at least backed byhis believing in those areas. Bob [Robert T.] Schimke is that guy’s name that Icouldn’t think of a minute ago.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right. Johnson: A pretty good guy I might add, a nice guy. But his father became terribly ill. Ithink he was actually an early shareholder, but he couldn’t continue to be thechief scientist who ran the company. Then we did hire a guy, a scientist whohad been a New York U. sprinter to come out and head up the organization ofthree or four people.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that Winston Salser? Johnson: No, that was not Winston Salser. I should go to Winston Salser first, that’squite correct. Schimke knew Salser at UCLA, and so Bill went down to talk toWinston, and I did also a little later. Winston was the scientist around whomthe company was actually formed when Bob Schimke couldn’t do it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Of all the molecular biologists that are out there, why Winston Salser?  Johnson: I think your interview with Bill will tell you more than I can, but he metWinston Salser, and Winston agreed to be the forming scientist of thecompany. He had a good reputation and he was at a fine school, UCLA, so hewas working in the field. We did, at that point, hire this guy—I remember himbecause he had been a sprinter for NYU, and he came in and was heading upthe daily effort in the lab.But it was clear that he wasn’t going to be thepresident and the CEO.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. Johnson: Abbott, the company Abbott, had given a leave [of absence] to GeorgeRathmann, who was its chief scientist, to spend several months on sabbatical.He spent it in Winston Salser’s lab, coming up to date on the then latest inbiotechnology. So we met George in the course of that sabbatical. Winston, Ithink, suggested him to us. By then I was involved in it, a little after Bill—Icouldn’t give you the exact timing. They had formed it, and then a couple ofmonths later I made a smallish investment with my family partnership andwent on the board two or three months later, something like that. But therewas nothing going on. They treat me like a founder, and in a way I was,although Bill’s actually the founder and a very good man.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And who else was putting money into it? Johnson: Well, at that point it was just Sam Alstetter and Bill and our familypartnership. But soon afterwards, George Rathmann came on board, so I thinkthe next step is to talk about George Rathmann. I may be losing a fact or twobecause it is about thirty-eight years ago. George got interested in thecompany, and Bill and I talked to him. Finally, in a moment that’s recreatedover on my shelves over there—which we recreated later—George came andwe asked to see him. He was up here. So we went in my back yard and sat inthe back yard, and we asked George to join us—almost like asking someoneto marry you. We asked George to join us, and he said well, he was interested,but he was pretty sure Joy wouldn’t want to leave the North Shore of Chicago.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And you were pretty much going on Winston Salser’s recommendation? Orhad you checked him? Johnson: Well, no, Salser introduced us, he didn’t recommend him—well, I guess herecommended him, but Bill and I were making our own judgment here.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Had you done any background checking?  Johnson: Oh before that of course we did. We found out a lot about him. He’d been at3M, we talked to people there. We talked to some people quietly at Abbott.We didn’t want to blow his cover at Abbott. So no, we just didn’t go onWinston’s [introduction]—you don’t know Bill and me! [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I’m trying to get at the process as well. Johnson: We called—several phone calls to people, all of whom thought he was good.We had some side checks into Abbott, I don’t remember with whom. Wecertainly talked to people—at 3M I’m almost sure it was. People had a lot ofrespect for his energy and his science and his leadership. Of course, we metwith him a time or two, and we were very impressed by him too. So before weactually had the meeting where we asked him to marry us in my back yard, wehad met him a couple of times before. His response was interesting. “I reallyam interested, but I’m not so sure Joy’d like to come out to live inCalifornia”—from the life with the family they had in the North Shore. I can’ttell you the town—let’s say Highland Park or something. So we said right on the spot—bring Joy out here. We’ll fly her out, we’llobviously pick up the tab for that, and do bring Joy out so she can see Venturaand Oxnard. The company was already located in Thousand Oaks, and wedecided not to move it. So within a few weeks, a couple weeks, Joy came outand did love the beach at—was it Oxnard? It was Oxnard where they moved.There was a nice beach community there, and she was kind of fascinated byus, so then he accepted. We made an economic proposition, sort of a normalone, to bring somebody into a company. It was very late ’80 that thishappened. There’s a historical date that I can’t give you, so George came out,and I imagine he probably moved out in early ’81, but he agreed to come. I believe that Ray Baddour, from MIT, had been a co-investor. I skipped overRay. I came in [as an investor] and I think Ray Baddour came in shortly afterthat.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: With his own personal funds? Johnson: Just his own personal investment. These were small investments. WhenGeorge came on board, the first thing we needed to do was to raise somemoney. We cooked up a venture capital offering of— There was a bit of anargument about whether we raise a little money and try to get to a milestone,then raise more money at a higher price. George was pretty insistent, and weagreed with him, to raise a larger amount of money. I think the number was$15 million or so. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, it was $15 million. Johnson: You’re straining my memory. But for the purposes of discussion, it’s aboutthe right amount. So at that point Abbott came in, because they thoughtGeorge was pretty impressive, and Tosco, an oil company, I have no ideawhy. Oh, I know why they came in—because they thought we could developsomething to eat up oil spills.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I have a note about New Court partners. Johnson: New Court [Securities Corporation] was a venture firm based in England—that was the street they were on, New Court, but they had a New York office.They came in and then Jim [James C.] Blair and his firm came in.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now how was this happening? Were you calling around and telling peopleabout this opportunity? For example, how did New Court even know. Johnson: I don’t know exactly how New Court heard about it. It may be somebody Billknew. I made a couple of calls myself. I think I might have approached JimBlair. We were not looking for credit so much as money. [chuckling] Soeverybody made calls, and we got a bunch of people interested, but whoelse—am I leaving somebody out? Then some individuals, some friends ofmine like Bill Edwards and John Bryan, just individual investors, came in atthat point as well.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was it quite common in those days to have a number of very smallinvestments? Johnson: Investors?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You keep saying that these were not large investments. Johnson: I don’t remember the amount, but the amount which Abbott put in, the amountwhich New Court put in, the amount which Jim Blair’s company put in, thosewere hundreds of thousands.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, I see.  Johnson: I think my first investment was $60,000 if I remember right, and I put a littlebit more in this next round.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And was that kind of par for the course for you in those days? Johnson: Well, first of all, deals were smaller then. That was a big financing to do $14-$15 million in 1980. But having been an investor in almost the first round, atthe very opening of the company, later on that represented quite a bit of stock,still does. I wish I had these numbers better in mind, but the sense of it is thatwe then had a round of investors at a somewhat increased price whichincluded the people I’ve mentioned and probably some I’ve not mentioned,like a guy from Chicago who came in then. Steve Lazarus. But anyway, wehad this group that formed the basic board, and some of the people stayed onthe board quite a while. Then Abbott put a guy on the board, a guy namedKirk Raab who later became president of Genentech in a roundabout way wego through.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right, exactly! All the connections are amazing. Johnson: Steve Lazarus’s firm came in early on, from Chicago. Steve stayed on theboard for a long time. Steve was a very, very helpful director. He understoodthe business. Actually they all were. Baddour was a scientist and a good one.Bowes and I stimulated action, you might say. We had lots to do with pickingthe various CEOs over the years. We certainly picked George and thenGordon Binder. By the way, you should read Gordon Binder’s book [ScienceLessons].<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh I did. That’s one reason I waited to talk to you again. Johnson: I’ve only read about three chapters of it now.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, one thing that I found interesting, and this actually came from a set ofinterviews I did with George Rathmann. He said that the original setup wasthat the scientific advisory board, which was a luminous board— Johnson: Yes, it was.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: —was to report to the board of directors, and George said, “No way.”  Johnson: Yes, I don’t remember that issue. It never did. George may have rememberedsome discussion about that, but I don’t think it was ever much of an argumentthat the scientific advisory should report to the board. It wouldn’t work. Atfirst they reported to Winston Salser before George came, then they reportedto [George]. But they were distinguished. I can’t name them all, but there wasNorman Davidson from Caltech and a guy from Colorado—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, Caruthers. Johnson: Marv [Marvin H.] Caruthers from Colorado and then a guy named [Eugene]Goldwasser from Chicago.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Who became very important. Johnson: Oh, yes, they all were. Except for Genentech, there must have been other littlegames in town, but we were the main place where they could use theirexpertise to really make things happen, and they did. They met often andGeorge gave them terrific, stimulating leadership.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you think that by then it was obvious to molecular scientists that thecommercial aspects of the molecular sciences were going to take off, and takeoff not only scientifically and commercially, but in terms of generatingpersonal wealth. Johnson: I think you know, intuitively, personal wealth comes with success. But theidea of generating personal wealth as a primary objective was not in thefore—we knew it would happen. I don’t mean anybody was going to not wantto make some money, but the interest level of all of us was to build a greatcompany, do the things that were required to build a great company.Especially in biotech, you get so excited about what you can do to helppeople’s health, those things all put together. Completely unrelated to this, I remember talking to Bill Hewlett one time. Ihad a long talk fishing one time, and he said, and I had him tell this to myclass later, that when they started Hewlett-Packard, they were thinking aboutbuilding a successful company. They were talking about good products, goodmarketing, scraping enough money together to grow and that sort of stuff. Hesaid, “I wouldn’t say it never occurred to us, but that was not what we weredoing. We were not deliberately creating wealth. We knew if we succeededwe’d make out fine.” I don’t think they ever thought about the size of that, butthey concentrated on building a great company and the wealth resulted fromthat.  People who chase wealth directly, they get lost in short-term considerationsand they don’t do the underlying stuff, so the same thing was true there. I’msure we all thought we’ll be richly rewarded if we build a company that canserve patients well. That was not far from our minds. The objective was moreof a competitive, building, creative kind of feeling. I’m not trying to be naïveabout making money; I’m just saying that if you don’t think of doing thingsright to build a great company, then that won’t happen anyway. You might aswell bear down on that. I don’t ever remember having any of these guys I’vejust mentioned, say to himself or herself, “We’re going to get rich if we dothis right.” Even though behind that you always know you’ll at least do well.billion company. That never occurred to me we’d do that; I just thought we’dbuild a really good company that would take advantage of genetic engineeringand really do a lot for patients. We had four projects that we thought we would do. I hope I can name them.One was something to eat up oils spills, the one Tosco was interested in. Theother was chicken growth hormone. It turned out you couldn’t do it in the gutso you had to inject 50,000 chickens a day or something, so that didn’t seemtoo good. A third one was an acridine dye, some sort of dye, and the fourthone was EPO [Epogen or erythropoietin]. EPO was the one that worked. Sowe had four different projects, and we talked with investors about those. Wetalked to ourselves about them, and we pursued them all up to a little ways.I remember one amusing— Very, very early, I was walking up the sidewalktoward the lab, and this horrible purple caterpillar with all kinds of thingssticking out came walking, I thought, “Oh my God, they’ve done it!”[laughter] It just occurred to me briefly—they’ve created a monster, orsomething. It was going to be a butterfly later, I’m sure, but it looked prettyhorrible at the time.The way you keep score in our business, in the end, is what kind of profit youmake, what kind of companies you build, and whether they become worth alot more than you have in them. That’s the score-keeping. But in the back ofyour mind or at least in the middle of your mind one of the purposes is togenerate personal wealth, but you do it if you succeed.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right, so to summarize could I say— Johnson: She’s putting words in my mouth! [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: —that a cornerstone of your philosophy could be said to be that you build agood company and the money will follow.  Johnson: [pause] Yes. You concentrate on building a good company, which meansgetting the right people, having great products, marketing them well, having agood organization, and getting adequate financing in the thing to make ithappen. And those are the immediate objectives, because if you don’t achievethose things, the rest of it doesn’t count. But the fact is, you do know thatwhen you build a great company, you’ll make money from your investment.So it isn’t that you don’t know that, it’s just that you concentrate on the firstthings first. And the first things first is building the company. Lots of guyswill tell you this. I’m not alone in this way.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, but is that maybe not happening quite so much nowadays? Is theremore—the money comes first. Johnson: I haven’t heard that too much. I think that we’ve got to give some credit toKleiner, Perkins, Caufield & Byers. They do very nicely those guys. Butthey’ve had a philosophy early on to not discuss their personal wealth, not talkabout their big deals and all that stuff. And Tom Perkins himself started that,that’s why it was so surprising in that TV interview he did when he began totalk about his own personal wealth. It wasn’t very Kleiner, Perkins to do that![chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, well, and his biography, his autobiography makes it pretty clear too. Johnson: Yes, I read that too. So Tom, Tom was a very good venture capitalist. He’s agood person to be a friend of. This last few years he’s gotten excited about hisown personal wealth and the things it can bring. But the things he did the bestweren’t generating wealth. The things he did the best were building somegreat companies, which he did concentrate on at the time.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, he has made a big thing about being how he and Gene Kleiner were sovery hands on in terms of managing their investments. Johnson: Oh absolutely, they were. But now in his life, what is he—seventy-five andhe’s quite candid. I wouldn’t say he’s hiding any emotions, but he feels theneed to honestly say that he is spending a lot of money on yachts andaccoutrements of different kinds, and it surprised me, that’s all. He’sabsolutely free to do what he wants and he’s not a bad guy, but thoseinterviews I don’t think are doing him any favors.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, how would you compare your management, your idea of working with acompany’s management to maybe what Kleiner and Perkins did.  50 Johnson: Very similar.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is it. And so— Johnson: Brook surely picked [some of] that up here, that you’re heavily involved.There are three ways in which venture capitalists, the way I see it, [areinvolved with a company.] The first one, they provide money to give thecompany some capital to operate with. [The second], they provide advice andhelp, and on a frequent basis, weekly in young companies very often, certainlynot less than monthly. The balance is between advising the management andtrying to run the company yourself. If you get the management too dependenton you, or you’re too assertive and they get too resistant, you’ve got to get thisbalance of discussion of keeping things open so that people will ask you stuffsometimes. But the worst thing you want to hear is have a guy come to aboard meeting and he says, “I have three courses of action. Which one doesthe board want to take.” That’s really bad news when a guy does that. Whatyou want a guy or woman to come in and say is “Here’s where I want to go.”If you don’t like it then you can argue about that, but you don’t want themdependent on you for operating decisions. So you have money and you have advice and the third element is a little moresubtle. As I mentioned a little earlier in our talk, entrepreneurs are often verycompetitive, athletic-like people who like to win. They get enthusiastic,they’re hard-driving people, and they want to be a winner. They want theircompany to dominate a market, they want it to succeed in the market, theywant lots of things. And that kind of enthusiasm, which is not alone inathletes, it’s just athletic-like is what I’m trying to say—venture capitalistsoften share that. Entrepreneurs like to have someone who shares thatexcitement of the game, excitement of the chase, almost for its own sake—again not losing sight of what in the end, what’s there. So you have thissharing of desire and zeal. I call it zeal. Entrepreneurs have zeal and goodventure capitalists have zeal as well. When you put those things together, youoften have success.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So it is an emotional or motivational contribution, would you say? Johnson: That’s right. We contribute to that, and if we’re just very matter of fact andjust only look at numbers and criticize, that’s not enough. They should feelyour excitement, and you should feel excitement. If you don’t feel excitement,you’d better find another business. On the other hand, you’ve got to be hardnosed. You’ve got to ask people to step aside when they’re not doing the job.It’s not like it’s all fun. But that third element is not often mentioned inspeeches, but it’s an important part of venture capital. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I think what you’re implying is that there’s a very human element to all this,that personality counts. Your ability to size up and evaluate how anentrepreneur might actually function is part of it, is it not? Johnson: Yes, we look for zeal. We look for guys who give a damn—and women—thatwant to make things happen. You can be as bright technically, you canunderstand marketing, you can do all the intellectual part of it right. But if youdon’t yourself feel it and stimulate in your employees this same winning teamfeeling, you’re much less likely to succeed.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, if you think Amgen is a good example of this, I would like to hear moreabout how the mechanics actually work. How do you people, sitting on theboard of directors, interact with George Rathmann as CEO, with the scientificadvisory board, maybe even with the scientists in the company? How do allthose elements that go into a company actually work from your standpoint asthe venture capitalist? Johnson: It varies a lot with the personality of the CEO. So if you want to talk aboutAmgen specifically— When it was very young, we had monthly boardmeetings. They were down south. Bill and I were up here. We would sit down,Bill and I, from time to time with George just to review what was on his mind.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And George would come up here? Johnson: Yes, I can’t remember too many meetings up here, but we were in southernCalifornia—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You usually went down there. Johnson: We’d go down there, we’d stop by there because we were doing somethingelse. Then we had different committees on the board: we had a strategycommittee. The function of the strategy committee was interesting becauseAbbott was supportive with money and put good people on the board, butAbbott had its own axe to grind a lot. So we wanted to be able to meet andtalk about corporate strategies and things so that we could recommend to theboard courses of action without necessarily Abbott being present. Abbott onthe one hand was supportive and gave us money at a key time, and on theother hand, the guys that represented Abbott on the board also had Abbott’sbest interests in mind at all times, as well as ours. They were corporateexecutives; their job was to make Abbott prosper, and they showed that. Sowe had a strategy committee that did not include somebody from Abbott where we could talk about issues of our future, independent of what Abbottmight be doing.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And this was in a very general sense? How do we want to shape thiscompany? Johnson: Shape the company. Abbott had a lot of diagnostics work and there wasalways a concern by Abbott that we might go into diagnostics heavily. So wewanted to be able to talk about issues like that—although we didn’t ever do alot with diagnostics, by the way. Then the scientific advisory committeewould meet with George, and sometimes I visited one scientific advisorymeeting, but not normally. That was for scientists to talk about science.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But how did that information from the scientific advisory board— Johnson: It went to George.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Would George give a report at a board meeting? Johnson: No, George used it in his decision—George would take it and make practicalcourses of action out of it, like what project do they want to fund. Of course, itwould come up in the discussion of things he wanted to do, that the scientificadvisory board had recommended it or had thought this was a good area topursue. Then we had a guy named Dan Vapnek from University of Georgia to be ourchief scientific officer. He was very involved with the scientific advisoryboard, so he and George would talk about projects they wanted to do and thenthey’d bring that to the board. They would explain the science, they wouldexplain what some of the background was from the scientific advisory board.And then we had a science committee. That was a little bit controversial. Idon’t think Dan Vapnek really wanted a science committee. He didn’t want tohave a subcommittee where he had to report what was going on in science. Iwasn’t on that on purpose. We had the normal audit committees. We had a committee about directors andofficers and compensation—those were sort of mixed together. So it was thestrategy committee I already mentioned which was a very important—thiscommittee where really things were talked about. No action would be taken,but we had very candid discussions about things in kind of a closed meeting,and George was certainly active in that. But all the board meetings were wideopen. People could discuss things and there was no particularly hiddenagenda. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Which committee were you on? Johnson: From the beginning, oh let’s see. There was an executive committee from dayone. I’ve forgotten to mention that. So Bowes and I and George, I believe,possibly Ray Baddour, we had this executive committee that was empoweredto act for the board in-between meetings. We never did really, because wewouldn’t take a step even though we were authorized to do so without theboard knowing about it. But we’d meet from time to time in-between boardmeetings and review matters of note. I’d have to look in the records, butBowes and I and Rathmann, and I believe Ray Baddour was on thatcommittee too. But we gave George a place to hammer out stuff that he was hoping to sell tothe board later. [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was he a pretty good salesman? Johnson: A very good salesman! His enthusiasm—he could attract people to come workthere like nobody. Much, much later on, when he was the chairman of Icos[Corporation] but not the CEO, they had a change in presidents up there, andone of the directors called me and said, “We’re thinking about making Georgethe CEO of this company. What do you think about George as a CEO?” I said,“All he is is the best there is.” [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And wasn’t he, for those very early days of biotech, unusual in having such afirm business sense as well as the scientific background? Johnson: Yes, I think his— He was a physical chemist. I think his work at 3M was notinvolved [with business administration], but it certainly was in directingAbbott’s efforts. I think that he was in the higher levels there, and he just sawAbbott grappling with its business problems. I’m talking outside of my ownknowledge here, but he was a good businessman. He sensed markets andmarket sizes and what we might do to serve those markets. I may have mentioned this earlier—one of the great satisfactions of anybiotech deal is that the results of your work are certainly profitabilitysometimes, but it’s also the satisfaction of creating drugs that help people. Justthis last weekend, I was playing golf with a guy, and he said he’d been treatedfor lymphoma, and he was getting better. I said, well, was it non-Hodgkin’slymphoma? And he said, “Yes.” I said, “Are you taking a drug calledRituxan?” And he said, “Yes, I am and it’s working.” I said, “Well, that drugwas developed by IDEC,” another company I was involved in. It gave me awonderful feeling to think that after all those board meetings and jumping up and down—and of course, probably a million or maybe hundreds of thousandsof people it helped. But here I met with a guy who I was playing golf withpartly because Rituxan had kept him alive. It’s a great feeling. It’s a greatfeeling.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It’s different than producing widgets, isn’t it? Johnson: Not like a computer—well, okay—my computer frustrates me too!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, that brings me to another question. Amgen was founded in 1980. Johnson: Correct.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Genentech had been around for four years. Johnson: Correct, also.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But nobody—Biogen, Amgen, Genentech, Genetics Institute, none of them—had produced a product yet. An investment in any new venture has an elementof risk, but it seems to me that without a product even on the horizon, thatinvesting in these young biology-based companies had an exaggeratedelement of risk. Did you feel that? Johnson: Yes, but that’s what I was doing for a living. I was trying to back areas that Ifelt could be big and could be good, so that I didn’t think I could lose thismoney. I knew it, of course. I thought, here’s a chance to get involved ingenetic engineering early on in a company with a good person running it,although I was involved before George was. Without George, that companywould have faded away. It would have just been a loss. It was verystimulating.This is true of any venture: you don’t think about losing money, you thinkabout what an investment can do, especially startup venture capital in somestrange area. So you use your hunches, you use what you read, you use yoursense of the practicality of the science, where the science is workable. Youbring all that together on kind of a judgment call. I was trying to tell my classwhen I taught it—you can’t calculate all this. You should run the numbers—you have to run the numbers, but in the end you’ve got to have a sense ofbalance of the likelihood of success and what you need to do yourself to makethings succeed. And the venture capitalist can play a substantial role insuccess by selecting the right people, encouraging them, getting them incentivized, and then helping the companies devise strategy. That’s animportant venture capital function.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So it would not be correct to say that Amgen was just another investment,right? Did you know from the start that you were onto something good? Johnson: No, but I knew that the area was big. I saw along with others the fact thatgenetic engineering was going to change the way we developed differentdrugs to treat people, because we could create human hormones using otherorganisms, and we could put human genes into other organisms, in this case E.coli or Chinese hamster ovary cells, and make them produce things thatpeople needed. If you’re short of something in your own body, but we couldmake it in a lab and give it to you, then that is basically what is done withgenetic engineering. There’s also monoclonal antibodies that are generated byhybridomas, which is a slightly different thing, but it’s all part of the samegame. But the answer to your question is, you know it’s going to be a big area. Whatyou don’t know is, is your company going to be the one that makes it. That’swhere the footrace comes in, that’s where the competitive zeal makes a bigdifference, besides the judgment and the ability to finance it. One of the risklevels that you have to think about is will you be able to get enough moneytogether to make this thing succeed? Companies can get a great idea withgreat leadership. If they don’t have enough money they can’t develop theirproducts. And as you just pointed out, it took a long time. I don’t think we hadEpo on the market—we had it approved, but I don’t think we started selling itfor about ten years.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It was a long time. And did that come as a surprise to you? Were youexpecting it to take so long to actually produce a product? Johnson: It was not a surprise. We knew it would take a long time. We knew by theFDA process. Maybe it was a little longer than I’d hoped for, but I don’t thinkit was a surprise, because in our meetings we would talk about where aproduct was in the lab. First of all it took us a while to even select Epo out ofthe ones that we had available to us. The impracticability of the chickengrowth hormone, the stuff to eat up the oil spills—I didn’t even know whythat didn’t go ahead. It just maybe didn’t work very well, and the dye—thisability to make a different dye. But we started to focus on Epo pretty early onand—[pause to change tape] <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: At the risk of spending too much time on the beginning of Amgen—but youwere there. Johnson: I was there all right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: At the beginning. At that time there was concern about biohazards related torecombinant DNA. One of the things that had frustrated George Rathmann atAbbott was that the company went overboard in being concerned aboutbuilding elaborate laboratories. The company had decided, for whateverreason, to be ultra cautious in regard to their handling of recombinant DNA,so much so that at least in Rathmann’s opinion it pretty much tied their hands. Johnson: I didn’t realize that about Abbott or George’s opinion of that. But I don’t thinkGeorge made that a major factor in telling us why he might come with us.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you remember any discussion at the board level about the NIH guidelines[for recombinant DNA research], and there were certain kinds of research thatwere considered dangerous. Johnson: Oh absolutely. I remember the discussions and I remember the NIH guidelinesfor sure, but that had more to do with containment in the labs of things wewere doing. Not so much how the drugs might adversely affect people. Wehad certain rules about the rooms and positive pressures, and we followed theNIH guidelines quite closely because they were sensible.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And yet if you remember, the NIH guidelines technically applied only toinstitutions that were receiving federal funds, but as far as I know, almost allthose early companies followed them. Johnson: Yes, we followed them. I remember the discussions. I didn’t go and inspectthe labs and know everything, but I know as a policy we adopted the NIHguidelines for the conduct of our labs, because otherwise what would you goby? Your own rules—you might not understand all the issues. I don’tremember any specific discussion, but I remember clearly the NIH guidelinesand the company’s decision to follow them. I can’t give you a dramaticmoment, though.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I would think, too, that a consideration would be, if we don’t follow theguidelines, it’s not going to be politically attractive.  Johnson: I don’t think that was an issue. I think the issue was, we need to follow someguidelines which have been set by people who probably know what they’retalking about, to keep the genetic engineering activities inside the building orinside a certain lab and a certain [fume-extraction] hood, because it is truethings could get out. Sometimes we think well, that’s pretty far-fetched. Idon’t think there was a thought about it might be politically bad or we mightget sued. I think George had a very strong sense of responsibility to not letthose things happen. Yes, we would have been sued if we’d done bad things,yes, it would have been politically bad—maybe in the back of the mind, butthat was not in the forefront of the discussion.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did that mean building more secure laboratories? Johnson: More secure than what?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, than the usual lab-bench way that molecular biology had been done upuntil then. Johnson: Our labs were built from the beginning with that [security] in mind. In otherwords, we didn’t have to change them. Since I wasn’t there spec-ing the labsand watching the construction and making sure, all I can tell you for sure isthe company had a policy from the earliest days of following the NIHguidelines about containment. What I can’t tell you is if we did follow themthat closely, but I think we did. And that was George’s policy, and why not. Itwas a sensible decision. It just seemed practical. You’d read them all, you’dsay—well, come on is that really a potential [danger] or are they overworrying it? Well, maybe they were, but I think the issues that were more ofconcern were, can we purify these hormones enough in the process so thatthey do what we want them to do and nothing else? But that was a level ofdetail beyond what I normally dealt with. Policy yes, absolutely.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What about a stock option plan for employees? Johnson: We had it from the beginning.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that pro forma? Johnson: It was common, yes. We knew that if you’re going to attract good people,whether they’re scientists or down the line, you want to have a plan so thateverybody feels like an owner, and that if you had an option and the company succeeded greatly, then people were incentivized by that. We even hadoptions before we went public. Options became controversial later whenpeople felt that people were manipulating the option prices, and that was aftercompanies were public. But I don’t know if we ever had any problems withthat issue at Amgen. But we had an interesting group of people who very earlyon had a nice set of options and made a lot of money from their options andkept on working. We called them our volunteers. [chuckling] They didn’thave to work, they just loved it. They went out there and developed productsand enjoyed it. A couple of guys moved to Montana and went fishing, butthat’s their business too. The last of the major volunteers just retired here acouple of months ago.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, that’s a pretty long history of volunteering! Johnson: Oh yes, the guys from the beginning with those early options made millions ofdollars. And should have and deserved it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But had it been commonplace for you, in investing in companies prior to that,to see that an employee stock option plan was instituted? Johnson: Yes, it was common.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So it’s not something that came with biotech. Johnson: It’s not something Amgen invented. We just thought it was necessary. I thinkthe issue had to do with how widespread are options. In other words, theexecutives always had them, but we had options at Amgen all the waydown—everybody had at least some options. I think that’s true.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Everybody—the bottle washer. Johnson: I think so, yes, I’m pretty sure everybody had some. They were small for thepeople that were—but it was helpful to them.I remember I had a meeting with Fidel Castro once, and I had just given a talkat a meeting in Havana. This is about ten years ago or more perhaps. They hadtwo major biotech labs there, both of which could have been companies. So inmy talk to a biotech group I said how they should take tthese labs, make theminto companies, give the executives and all the employees some options sothat they could have ownership and raise capital from outside of— Theycouldn’t do it in the United States, but to raise capital from elsewhere.  So Castro said in this long meeting that started at 10 p.m.,“Tell me what yousaid. My son was there—Fidelito—tell me what you said.” And I told himwhat I said. He already knew what I said, by the way. I wasn’t fooled for aminute. So he said, “Well, Mr. Johnson, I’ve just been telling you how wespent years here trying to achieve social justice. If we did the things yousaid”— (He had a wonderful interpreter. I know enough Spanish to hear itdirectly, but I worked through an interpreter, as wisely I should, but she wasperfect.) “—some people would have more money than others and we’reworking toward social justice.” So I said, “Well, Mr. President”—everybodyelse called him comandante, but I said, “Mr. President, if some people hadmore money than others, but everyone lived better because of that, couldn’tyou call that social justice too?” And he said, coldly but not hostilely, “Mr.Johnson, I know those arguments.” [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You’re not going to change my mind. Johnson: No, no. He wasn’t about to. But I thought as long as I was invited to go, and Ifinally talked the State Department into letting me go— The big issue wasflying my own plane there. You have to get a special permit to go to Cuba,and it took me a long time to get that, but I did go and had a very interestingvisit. They had major efforts in biotechnology there, and so I was glad to godown. The State Department said, “How do we know you’re not going to helpthem?” I said, “I am going to help them understand. That’s the point—to helpthem understand the business so they can maybe change their society a littlebit.” So they finally bought that argument.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Very interesting. You made it pretty clear that in the beginning, the array ofAmgen’s products was very broad. You mentioned indigo, chicken growthhormone, et cetera. Johnson: They were potential products. They weren’t products.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Potential products. Johnson: They were things that we thought we could do with the technology. One ofthem worked. [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, talk about what I’m presuming was a change of tactics when Amgenbegan to become a therapeutics company. Am I right in that? Johnson: EPO is a therapeutic.  60<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, it is. Was it EPO that switched things to therapeutics? Genentech also atthat point had a pretty broad product line. Johnson: We never went very far with those other [projects]. Those were like thebrainstorming, original ideas when Amgen was founded. None of the otherthree went very far. The company’s first job and its first achievement was tomake EPO in quantity in a lab, get it through the FDA, and to get it intopeople’s hands to build up red blood cells. There are two other kinds of bloodcells that are of interest. Leukocytes are white blood cells. Erythrocytes arethe red blood cells. And then there’s something called platelets. So we thoughit was a natural if we could assist people to build up their white blood count,which is necessary, it turned out later, during cancer treatments when yourimmune system gets compromised. And then platelets—we thought we’d havethose three products. Well, we never did develop a good platelet product untillately. Now they have one. That was supposed to be the three big deals.Epogen and what we called that Neupogen.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: The neutrophils. Johnson: For neutrophils, and it was called G-CSF—granulocytes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, colony-stimulating factor. Johnson: We never did say, “Let’s become a therapeutics company.” Our product forplatelets—I don’t remember what the problem was—it didn’t work out. So wepushed ahead with those two products [Epogen and Neupogen] and theybecame major products. Then we bought a company that had Enbrel, to treatrheumatoid arthritis, and that became another $3 billion-level product. People often worry about our pipeline, but right now we have this— I’m noton the board, but I can certainly speak about public information. We have aproduct, Denosumab, which will have a dual purpose. One is treatingosteoporosis, mostly in women. In bone cancer, the bones become very weak.We have found in some clinical trials so far that the treatment with this stuffcan prevent the bones from getting so weak, because it stops the mechanismby which the bone is destroyed. There’s something called osteoclasts. I’mthrowing these names around as if I really understand it, but osteoclasts areinhibited by this Denusomab. And so if they’re right, then women who aretaking other drugs, once a week or once a month, can have a semi-annual shotthat should relieve them of problems with osteoporosis. There’s quite a fewbone cancer cases where bones get very brittle and fracture easily. This shouldbe a major help there. Of course, it’s not on the market yet. It’s not throughthe FDA, but these are the indications that look good, at least as far as I know in the public information that I have. I get zero inside information fromAmgen anymore, on purpose. [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is there a story around the IPO? Johnson: Oh not too big a story. We decided we needed, I think it was, 40 millionbucks. It’s pretty close to the right number. We talked to a number ofinvestment bankers. At that point in history it was possible to go public onhigh hopes, which we certainly had. We went public and recharged our gastanks with cash. But I don’t remember an exciting story about it. I don’tremember a moment of crisis or a difficulty in pricing or investment bankersbehaving badly. I don’t remember who the investment banker was, but it wasa good smooth transaction.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: The only side issue that I remember from reading Binder’s book is that he wasactually on the stock market floor at the IPO. Apparently there was a gaspwhen the trading began and the share price fell below the $18 that had beenset. Do you remember that? Johnson: No, I didn’t. The stock did go on up, not sharply. Genentech went up threetimes [starting share price] when it was offered, but our stock did okay. Iwasn’t there and I don’t remember the story. I think I remember hearing that itdipped down for a while and then went back up. But I don’t remember hearingany gasps.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But you weren’t there with your white knuckles. Johnson: No, I wasn’t there. At that point I knew the company had a very good chanceof success, and going public was a way of getting some money. Once we gotthe money, the immediate stock price was not of great interest to me.Obviously, it was of some interest because we wanted it to be a successfuloffering.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I’m wondering if you could say something in general about how yourassociation with Amgen was, or was not, typical of your investments. Johnson: Well, it was typical in one sense. I’ve had a number of good things that cameto me through very close business associates and friends like Bill Bowes. Iheard about Amgen from Bill Bowes; he wanted me to be involved. It was amutual thing, so it wasn’t that he just did me a favor, although certainly it wasa great favor, but he also wanted to have somebody that he could trust and could work on the deal with him, and that was me. So it was pretty typical forme to get involved in something where somebody knows us or me. It’s also quite typical for us to dig out deals where we are the first investors.[For example],a very long-time association [was] with a very good companycalled Boole & Babbage, which ended up quite successful, but it was a long,long time. I used to co-invest with these three or four other individuals—JohnBryan, Bill Edwards, and—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You mean routinely you would. Johnson: Routinely in the sixties and seventies. And [with] some other people—HaleBrothers and Bill Draper quite often. But anyway, so John Bryan heard aboutthese two guys that were starting this really first software products company,so I heard about it from them. But they just said, “Here’s a lead.” I get allkinds of leads. So that’s one where I sized it up myself in 1967, thought I’dget involved with these guys, and got involved and stayed involved for a longtime. But I don’t know whether I was too patient or not making somemanagement changes, but by bringing in people, running it myself for a fewweeks at a time in between managements— Boole and Babbage is probably adefining long-term investment. I stuck with it for a long time, and we did verywell. In the end it merged with BMC Corporation, which is doing okay. It’slike everything else, the old Boole business is fading off, with one majorexception. The thing that would typify me and our office is heavy involvement with thecompanies. Substantial involvement. I don’t have any companies, really,where we don’t—where one of us in the office isn’t either— Sometimes we’renot on the board, we’re observers, and rarely we’ll be into a deal wheresomebody else looks after it. We just don’t do that much. There’s severalreasons that I’m into heavy involvement in companies. I like it. I like the kindof men and women that run companies, so I like being with them. I like theexcitement of the competition that we talked about before, sharing that withthem. And I like the idea as a technically trained but not necessarily technicalperson, I like being able to use, to help make judgments that involve technicaldecisions without trying to be a technician about it. The other thing, which is not necessarily very businesslike is I really lovetalking to the engineers and seeing what’s going on about the technology. I’dsay if there’s a characteristic that I have, I hope the most important one ishonesty, and I try not to fail myself there. But the other one is involvement inthe companies. But I don’t always give good advice. I’ve made mistakes. I’vehired people that didn’t work. We all have had a series of things we couldhave done differently, but it’s a batting average, you know? And my battingaverage is good. I’m not the greatest slugger in the business, but I’ve got a good solid batting average for a long time. But involvement would be thecornerstone of what I believe venture capital is. Involvement and help to thecompanies.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I think that’s a good place to stop. Johnson: Okay.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It is the third session and it’s July 7, 2008. Johnson: That it is.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: On our first phone call, you told me that the old guard, and I’m paraphrasingwhat you told me, doesn’t call it venture capital. Johnson: Doesn’t call it VC.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, the abbreviation. Johnson: Yes. We call it venture capital all the time. We don’t say VC. All young guysand women say VC, and the press calls it VC. But it just seemed kind ofslangy at the time. Maybe we were trying to take ourselves seriously. I don’tknow why, but I’ve kept up the habit of calling it venture capital. And most ofthe old guard do, but they’re all inactive now, mostly. At least, they’reobservers on the side a little bit like me, although I’m pretty active. But VC iscommonly used. I know what it means. I just notice it when people say VC,but there’s really nothing wrong with it. Venture capital is the name of thebusiness, and we just don’t use a nickname for it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: The other thing that I remember your saying in that same phone call was thatyou don’t consider venture capital a financial business. Johnson: No, I don’t. It’s not primarily a financial business, no. It’s substantiallyfinancial, but there’s really three parts to it. The first part, obviously isproviding capital to companies; the second part is providing guidance and assistance and help with a number of duties other than direct management;and the third one is more subtle, but it’s there—and that is that entrepreneurs,the men and women that start companies, are quite competitive. They’reathletic in that sense of the word. Some have been athletes, some haven’t, butthey have that drive to succeed, this unwillingness to fail, that’s characteristic.The venture capitalists—the good ones—the best ones, share this enthusiasm,this zeal that they have. So they sense that you’re as zealous as they are tosucceed. We all know there’s money to be made, we’re all doing it in the end, Isuppose, because it’s profitable. But there’s another side to that—it satisfiesour competitive instincts and satisfies us to be winners. And that is a spiritwhich almost every entrepreneur I know shares. They don’t want to win at allcosts, because for lots of reasons, including they want to make some moneywhile they’re going in, but winning is important. So I would say you’dcontribute money, you contribute advice, and you contribute zeal to thesecompanies. The third one—people could argue that one all day, but I think it’simportant. It’s certainly important in entrepreneurs. I look for it every time Imeet somebody—do they give a damn about whether they succeed or not?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you think that third element is something that is more typical of the firstgeneration of venture capitalists? Johnson: Well, the young guys and women are terrific. I wouldn’t second guess at alltheir skills, the devotion they have to the business. There’s probably a littleless attention to that. One thing that’s happened is the funds have become big,and the money to be made from ordinary income, from managing the money,has become high. So it has become, partly because of the presence of privateequity, you would say on the scale a little above us, has made a lot of guys toact like they’re in a financial business. I’ve had people say, “You’re in thefinancial business.” Or, “You’re a financial man.” I always deny that. I say,“I’m a venture capitalist, which is a hybrid.” No, I think the young generationof men and women that are in venture [capital] are terrific. They examinethings a lot—but I don’t suggest that they don’t have that quality of helpingcompanies. Now sometimes they don’t know how, if they’re tooinexperienced and they interfere—but that’s the danger of helping. And manyof them want to succeed, but it’s so large now. I come from an era, Bill Draper and I in particular, although he was withSutter Hill for a long time which did manage other people’s money. Basicallyour firm, and some others, because they go back, primarily manage their owncapital within the office. We have a few outside investors too that we broughtin who wanted to be with us for those reasons, including one Indian tribe that Ilike. But we’re basically managing the capital within this office, mostly ourown family. So we have a different kind of attitude. We take a little longer. We’re not in any big rush to get things done. Although the latest thing we didis structured as a fund because it does have some other investors. But the business is probably more financial now than it was, because there’sso much money to be made from management fees, and that wasn’t true[before]. In the old days—all guys talk like this—we didn’t even take thewhole management fee. We said we’d make the money on the investmentsand on the carry when we had some other people’s money in, but not on themanagement fees. But now everybody takes all the management fees,including us, that are coming.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you take some management fees? Johnson: Oh absolutely, always, yes. Feed the kids and all that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But the percentage has gone up? Johnson: No. It always has been a custom of when you had outside investors of taking a2.5 percent management fee and 20 percent of the profits. Some of the firmsbump that percentage of profits up. I don’t know many that bump thepercentage of capital for management fees up. Some firms get 30 percent ofprofits, maybe even more. I just don’t know all the deals. But now, the abilityto earn a lot of ordinary income is part of the reason people come into thisbusiness, which makes it more of a financial business. It doesn’t make it aworse business, but it’s a very difficult business because it’s very hard to getliquid now. Almost no public market exists at this moment. Mergers are theonly—the sale of a company is about the only way out. Every so often somereally hot deal pops up and it goes public, but not lately. Google and eBay andsome of those did very nicely as new public companies, but that was a whileback that they did that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I read just this morning on the National Association of Venture Capitalwebsite that there were no IPOs in the second quarter of 2008, and it was thelongest period since 1978 that that had been true. Johnson: Well, I remember in 1972, Coherent—then called Coherent Radiation nowcalled Coherent, went public. I think there was only about five in the month ofMay of 1972. I think I have my dates correct. But that’s not zero.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: No, it’s not. But it is zero this quarter. Does that strike terror in your soul?  Johnson: I think it’s changing the venture capital business. If it doesn’t change, we’regoing to look more like private equity than we are like venture capital. Thenature of our country is that for a long time it’s been good to start a company,build it up, either take it public to get more capital and to get liquid from yourinvestment. It was a cycle of investment, go public, give the company furthergrowth capital, and it gives the investors and some of the management achance to cash out a little bit. That was the cycle. It was about a five- toseven-year cycle from startup to liquidity. That cycle has disappeared, partly because of the excesses, I guess we couldsay just to lump them, of the late nineties, when people took companies publicwith nothing but high hopes and a good Website and plenty of hits, with noplan for being profitable or growth. People bought on anything that soundedlike Internet and a lot of people lost a lot of money, and it really destroyed,after 2000, the public market—not destroyed completely, but if you couple itwith the financial crises of last year, the subprime lending and all that, and alot of discouragement, why, it’s just not possible to go public. I feel certain that the cycle of startup company, build it up to many tens ofmillions, a few tens of millions, be profitable and have good prospects—therewill come a time when people will invest in those things. I don’t blameSarbanes-Oxley entirely, although it’s very cumbersome to be public nowbecause of the reporting requirements and the expense. Part of it’s calledSection 404, which has what to me are onerous reporting requirements. I dothink Sarbanes-Oxley did some important things, though, so I’m not against it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What do you consider important? Johnson: Oh, I think it caused more accountability, caused more visibility. Some of thereporting requirements are good—it made the presidents, the CEOs takeresponsibility for the financial statements, which is one single good thing—they’ve got to sign off on them now.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did that mean that before, the CFO signed off? Johnson: Yes, the CFO and the audit committee. It wasn’t like there was no oversight,but people got, especially when it got to be hot on those backdating optionsand all that stuff, some companies did the things that we were worried aboutthat Sarbanes-Oxley solved. Sarbanes-Oxley was not completely unnecessary,and like all reactions, I think it overreacted in terms of loading smallercompanies—big companies, it costs them about the same as a little companyto go through all these reportings. But I’ve seen the kind of money and the tension that young public companies— So companies don’t go public or theygo public in London because they don’t have to do that there.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh I see! So it has changed the market. Johnson: It has changed it a little bit, but that’s not the real [problem]. The problem isthat there’s no appetite in the marketplace for the securities of little companiesnow. People have been stung too much. I’m sure the investment bankerswould take things public despite Sarbanes-Oxley if they could sense that theycould sell the stock. So if you have a young company, $25 million sales, $30million sales, that needs another 15 million bucks, right now it’s impossible.It’s almost impossible to go public with a company like that because there wasso much disappointment in the high hopes that were so prevalent in the late1990s and the year 2000.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you think that the experience of the bubble had a cautionary effect onentrepreneurs and venture capitalists? That maybe you shouldn’t rush thingsso much, and that you have to make sure that your company is really going tosurvive and be profitable before you even think about an IPO? Johnson: Yes, I think it did change the nature of deals. For a while it was almost like aninsult—I’m overstating of course—to ask a guy who’d bring in a businessplan—well, what is the profitability? What is the growth? He’d say, “Oh, Ihave a great website; it’s got this many hits. You’re an old-fashioned thinkerlooking for profits and growth.” Well, I remember one incident at dinner witha guy and his wife. He was polite about it, but he thought that those were oldfashioned questions. People did build up heavy market values, took thingspublic without any profits—without even really any sales in some cases!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you ever tempted in that direction? Johnson: Tempted? Yes. Resisted mostly. We did some deals, but we never did anydeal that we didn’t think would become profitable. Tempted by the hot marketand the ability to go public pretty fast, yes, but never with one that didn’t havea business plan that showed profitability in a few years’ time.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you were still looking at the fundamentals? Johnson: We stuck with fundamentals, and a lot of people made a lot of money doingthe other things. In fact, we had a big argument in the venture communitybecause everybody knew it was a bubble, everybody knew that it wouldn’t goon. But the argument was, you have a duty to make money for your limited partners the best you can. And if you know things can go public quickly andyou can make a lot of money in a quick, multiple turnaround in a short timewith extremely high IRRs [internal rates of return], the argument was you owethat to your limited partners. Make money for them, that’s what they investedfor.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But the other side of that argument would be, I’m also responsible for themoney that I’m responsible for. Johnson: That was my side of the argument, yes. [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It’s sort of handy to forget that part of it! Johnson: But those guys weren’t wrong. I’m talking about very conscientious, fine menand women in venture firms, who felt that you could make money for a whiledoing that. So nobody could predict, really, when the bubble would end, butthey said, “While we’re in a bubble, let’s make money in the bubble.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you think that acting in that fashion has had a lasting effect above andbeyond the economic downturn? Johnson: Yes. It was painful, and a lot of people were hurt by the so-called high-techbubble. But 2000 was eight years ago, and so pretty soon the greed willovercome the pain. I’ve been through a lot of cycles now. I can’t give you allof them, but ups and downs, and [venture capital] always has come back. Now, can we say we’re in a different time of the world where the publicmarket for small companies won’t come back? I doubt it. I don’t know when.It won’t be in the next year or so, because of the general slowness of theeconomy. Money being spent on healthcare isn’t going down. Now they couldhave legislation in the next few years that will make it very difficult orunprofitable to start a healthcare company, but we have a worldwide lead inbiopharmaceuticals and in pharmaceuticals and biotech. If we set up taxes anddifficulties so that we don’t encourage that side of our business, it would be abad thing. But I don’t think we will, no matter who gets elected. I’m a littlescared sometimes about heavy leftward movements, but I really don’t know. Ijust know that we just can’t throw that away. It would be throwing away away in which the United States leads the world.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: One of the hot areas was, at least before this downturn, clean technology,which of course ties in with all the concern about global warming.  Johnson: Yes, that hasn’t gone down at all.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Will that still be an area of investment? Johnson: Yes, it is now. Some firms have really specialized in it. Kleiner, Perkins,Caufield & Byers set up a whole division or a whole group of men andwomen to do that. But clean technology deals are mostly not things that aresmall startups. They’re mostly big companies in existence because you’retalking about engines and fuels and ways of changing the ways in whichfactories are built and those kinds of things. We’re small enough so that weare not guys who invest tens of millions of dollars at a time. Some venturefirms do, and many private equity firms who come in later and do buyouts,they do that. Green tech will stay hot for quite a while, which is a good metaphor sincewe’re worried about global warming. Now whether those companies will besuccessful, how they’ll make money, how they’ll go public—I don’t knowthat. We’re not doing much of that, not because we’re against the environmentgetting better, it’s just not something where we can do investments. Now if wefound something that’s a small startup that we felt we could finance whichmight lead to a big company, we might consider that. But I think most of thetransportation systems and really big money deals are what green tech isabout. My own view is that we’ll find some balance. I don’t know, speakingfor myself, what the balance is between global warming being caused by anatural cycle and how much is caused by people. All I know is for sure,people are causing some of it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, they are. Johnson: So I think we should control what we can control without ruining oureconomy. So I’m not too much of a skeptic, but global warming has becomekind of a religion. It has a book, it has a prophet, it has apostates, it has peoplebeing punished for not being believers. So it has all those characteristics, andyou’ve got to step back from it and say, “What’s going on? What’s reallyhappening here?” In the last couple of weeks I’ve heard maybe Greenlandisn’t melting as fast as we think, but I think the environment is warming upover the decades and century or so. If CO2, in fact greenhouse gases, arecausing part of it or a lot of it, we should try to do something about that. Fromthe venture capital point of view, green tech, that general area, is hoping to dosomething about that problem.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Are the social implications of a business one of your considerations ininvesting in a company?  70 Johnson: Yes, we do think about that. I think it tends to bet in more of a negative sense.First of all, at the personal satisfaction level, a successful biotech companywhich leads to drugs that relieve or cure really difficult ailments, gives you atremendous sense of satisfaction. We’re working on a company right now,which we believe will cure Type 1 diabetes, which is a heck of a thing. Otherpeople are working on it too. We believe we’re on the right track using humanembryonic stem cells to produce beta cells that are in your pancreas, and thenwhen you have glucose in your blood, they will secrete insulin and do justwhat a pancreas is supposed to do. But for many young people, because ofimmune reactions earlier in their lives, their pancreas is essentially madedysfunctional. Type 2 diabetes is for older fat guys without exercise, butthere’s many, many more cases of Type 2 than Type 1. They’re almost likedifferent diseases. One, you can’t use your insulin; the other one you can’teven make any, to oversimplify of course. Some of it can’t be cured, but a lotof it could be cured by people staying thinner earlier in their lives and keepingup their exercise—and I’m no one to talk. [chuckling] Although so far, Ihaven’t got Type 2 diabetes or Type 1.But just to get back to that—if this company succeeds, of course, it’ll be quiteprofitable. All these young men and women, we know that they have to takeinsulin—you can’t really do that your whole life. You can control it for a longtime, but over time people have problems because they take too much or taketoo little. They have hypoglycemia, they have hyperglycemia, and it takes atoll on your organs, even on your limbs. So it’ll just be hugely satisfying ifthis thing works. We’ve had a lot of zeal go into that company as well asmoney.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Looking back on your investments over these many decades, has it been themedical applications that have inspired you in this way more than other linesof business? Johnson: I’ve found more personal satisfaction when we have letters from men andwomen saying, “Oh you helped me so much.” Amgen used to get great lettersfrom people with anemia who weren’t anemic any more, and they’d say, “Mylife has just changed. Thank you so much.” Amgen is very profitable, too, atthe same time. But Tandem Computers was very satisfying because it filled aniche in the computer area—distributing data processing and non-stopdependable computing. It was very satisfying when Tandem succeeded sowell, but I didn’t get that extra little bump from people being cured. But on the other hand, my cautions are not getting involved in businesseswhich I think, even though they’re legal, may not be any good for society.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What are you thinking of?  Johnson: Well, a guy came in one time and said that he had a terrific idea for a house ofprostitution in Nevada, which is legal, and he had all these business plans. Isaid, “Look, I don’t care, I don’t care.” [chuckling] “I don’t want to be in thatbusiness, period. I think it’s legal, and I think you may make a lot of money,but I just don’t care about that.” That’s an extreme example of what I mean. Idon’t want to be in that business period! [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I want to get back to one of the statements that you made in thebeginning, which was something along the lines that Asset Management doesbusiness in house—I’m paraphrasing. Johnson: We have a few outside partners, mostly families that know us and this oneIndian tribe that heard about us. But most of the capital is from my wife andmy kids and me.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, so that obviously gives you a lot of control, arguably more control than ifyou have Kleiner, Perkins partners determining an up or down, or yes or nosituation. Johnson: The way we do it here is pretty much like that. We have a group of three of uswho are general partners. The fact that I have such a heavy limited partnershipinterest doesn’t give me much of a legal right anyway. Even though I’m aheavy limited partner along with the rest of my family and some otherfamilies, when we’re in a meeting, as we were up until this meeting started—We have three general partners and three people whom we call partners.They’re not legally, technically, but they’re very much part of our team. Sowe argue quite vigorously about things, and we happen to have it so any of thegeneral partners can say no to a deal.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And that would hold? Johnson: Even when I wanted to do it—yes, they could say no.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Even though it’s basically your money? Johnson: Yes. That’s just the way I set it up so that we had more of a partnershipoperation. Now, when we had the straight family partnership, I was the onlygeneral partner. That thing is still operating, with additional investments in olddeals. I do have the sole say so and I exercise it. But we just felt it would bemore healthy to have a more normal general partnership relationship wherelegally two or three of us, I think, could overrule the other one. But as a practical matter we’ve agreed that if we don’t all like a deal, we’re not goingto do it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And that’s just a gentlemen’s or gentlewomen’s agreement? Johnson: Well, gentlewomen can make gentlemen’s agreements, yes. These are allthree guys.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] It’s not a legal part of the partnership? Johnson: Oh, it is a legal part of the partnership that the general partners have toapprove the deals, absolutely. I don’t think it’s in the partnership agreementthat it has to be approved by all the general partners, and that even though wedon’t have equal ownership, we have equal votes in the management. It maybe that we set up the partnership so that legally all the managerial partnershave to approve a deal.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Am I hearing you, though, that aside from deciding that maybe you need somemore voices in decisions, that there also were legal aspects that bent youtoward having more voices in the future? Johnson: Well, you set up a general partnership—the limited partners really havenothing to say about those decisions.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I’m talking about your partners. Johnson: Well, I have to separate my—I have two hats on. I have a hat as a familymember and as a person that’s invested as a limited partner. My other hat isI’m a general partner in the firm and there are two other general partners.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, and I’m talking about the general partners. Johnson: Well, the nature of a limited partnership is that the general partners make thedecisions. And if the limited partners make the decisions, they lose theprotections of being limited partners.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I know that.  Johnson: I suppose you’re right—one reason we have a partnership setup is so that ifanybody ever questions, did you make decisions as a limited partner? I say no,I made my decision as a general partner along with other general partners.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Had you gotten burned when you were operating as the sole general partner? Johnson: No, never got burned.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What prompted you to make the switch then? Johnson: Because we brought other investors in. When it was Asset ManagementPartners only, my wife and four kids were the limited partners. But I wasn’t alimited partner. I was only a general partner in that fund, so it was a third, athird, and the kids together a third. I’ve always heard and known that if you’re a limited partner you couldbecome considered to have liabilities. But now with some outside investors,even though they’re family friends and, as I said, one Indian tribe, we treat itlike any other fund and we have a general partner. I’m both a general partnerand a limited partner in this case. Even in much earlier funds where we hadsome outside people in them, I’ve always been an investor in the generalpartnership beyond just the minimums required. So I’ve never got burned, but with the structure of having some outsidemoney, we just felt we should have a more normal general partnership thatmakes decisions, and I didn’t want to be the only general partner. I’m not surethese guys would go along with that anyway, because they’re professionalsand they want to have their say so.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Then if the decision-making process is more or less like other firms, is thereanything that distinguishes Asset Management from other venture capitalfirms? Johnson: If we make a lot of money, we keep most of it, that’s what! [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That’s a good one! Johnson: We have a carry, a normal carry, that I share with these other guys and withother people in the company here. So the profit sharing is there. But thelimited partners, of which most of the interests are our family, sure—we makea great deal, the money stays home. We pay out some to the other limited partners, and then 20 percent of the profits end up being shared among theother guys in the office, including me. I take a normal share of the profitsharing. It’s called carried interest. You know about that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Okay. How about Asset Management in terms of looking at a potential deal?Is there any set of criteria that you use that might be a little different than whatother firms use? Johnson: Well, we emphasize startups a lot, although plenty of people [do].<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right. Why startups? Johnson: Because when you have smaller amounts of capital and you want to make alot of money, the multiples are higher if you succeed. You’re not as fast andthe IRRs sometimes aren’t any better. But if you can make ten times yourmoney in five years, that happens to be 58 percent IRR on that deal. We calculate returns on three levels. The portfolio return—that’s all themoney going into the portfolio and all the money coming out. The partnershipreturn—all the money that comes into the partnership from any source and allthat goes out. Then you have limited partner returns, which are all the moneythat comes in from the limited partners and all that goes out to them. Themiddle one is not calculated very much, but everybody calculates the portfolioreturn, and some people never talk about much more than that. [It] is higher,because you draw a circle around your portfolio, money goes in, moneycomes out, and that’s the multiple on the return. In the case of the limited partners, you draw a circle around them. All themoney they put in, all the money they get out—that’s the limited partnerreturn. That’s what most people think of from an investment point of view.But there’s also this other level where you draw a circle around the wholepartnership. All the money that goes into the partnership in general, limitedand general, and all the money that comes out to the limiteds and to thegenerals as well.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What about the more subjective side of it, the thrill of being in at thebeginning of a company. Does that at all enter in? Johnson: Yes, oh yes. There’s two things about it from a kind of a thrill side that I love.I like science and technology, so I love doing my homework on some of thesedeals and having those guys explain to me what they’re doing technically. It’sjust interesting. I’m an engineer. I went back and took some biotechnology atStanford after I got out, and I’ve always read about and liked science. I wouldn’t say I understand it at a bench level, but most things people are doingI at least get an idea of what they are doing. I love to talk to scientists aboutwhat they are doing, especially now with the stem cell initiatives and all thosethings that are using modern biotechnology, modern genetics. So that’s thethrill part of it—intellectually, I guess you’d call it. But another thrill part of it is the startup—the getting a company going,creating something where nothing was there before, looking at someone’sdream, usually someone else’s dream, and buying off on that dream andgetting in with them and making it happen. I just got back from the Olympictrials. It’s a little like wandering around the starting block before you get onthe blocks—it’s a very exciting moment. I remember from my own runningdays, you go into a bubble—you don’t hear anything but the starter’scommands. You don’t hear the crowd, you don’t hear anything. You’re just soinside yourself. Now it’s not quite that dramatic, but there’s some of that and that’s where thecompetitive zeal part comes in. Plenty of people have that who’ve never beenathletes by a long ways, but you hit a point that’s a good one. There is anexcitement and a thrill to getting a company going. It’s a slow-motion thrill,because things don’t happen for months. But you sense the desire and drive ofthe men and women running the company, you share in that, and when it doessucceed— When it fails it feels awful. It isn’t just oh okay, we lost a millionbucks. It’s not that easy. You failed.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So there’s an emotional commitment as well as a financial commitment? Johnson: Yes, and you could call that a weakness, too. Don’t fall in love with yourdeals is an old saying, and I probably err on the side of getting too interestedand excited about deals.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Does that mean that you have sometimes stayed in a deal too long or not madechanges soon enough? Johnson: Yes. Craig [C.] Taylor, who worked for me from the 1970s to the 1990s—there were about twenty years, so he obviously was influenced by me a lot,and before him, Brook Byers. Brook never said this, but Craig said, “Youknow, I had to unlearn something. I had to unlearn that you [can] stick with adeal forever.” And he was right about that. I’m a little weak on that, butsometimes it does pay. Sometimes if you just hang in there and work througha tough time like now, the payoff can be great. I really haven’t sat down company by company and reviewed whether Ishould have done something, changed managements, or just dropped out of the deal. Changing managements I’m not that bad. I’m a little slow, butyou’ve really got to give this guy or this woman a chance to succeed if youthink they can. If you don’t think they can, you should have decided that first,or sometimes you make a change pretty fast. I’ve had three or four times I’vejust sat down with guys and said, “I’m sorry. We’re going to have to make achange.” And often they’re guys I know and like even. No one likes to do it,period. It’s an awful thing to do. I’m not as good at recognizing and thendoing it as some other guys are.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you think that is because you’re somewhat clouded by the emotional sideof the investment? Johnson: Yes, probably. It’s probably because I care about the deals. And you can’tcare about the deals, like caring about the people. I don’t know if it’s aweakness—it’s a strength too. It’s a strength because they sense and you sensethat you’re in there to win, and when you change a president, when you asksomeone to step aside, it’s a moment of failure, really. But you’d rather havethe relationship fail than the company fail.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is a management change at the top, probably the crisis for a young company—aside from not having money. Johnson: No. Running out of cash, it gets your attention. The sight of the gallows clearsyour mind. [laughter] I didn’t say that, as you know, somebody said that, butthat’s so true. At a level, it’s crisis. You try to do it before there’s a crisis. Youtry to do it because you see the company heading south, or as they may say inAustralia, north, I don’t know. But we try to make changes and try to justobserve. Sometimes the signals come from inside the company—the peoplethere want a change. That’s happened at least once to me. You can’t not listento that! [chuckling] And sometimes it’s funny, in a way, because people sayfunny things. It’s in anticipation of a crisis you don’t want to face. That’s whatit is. By itself it’s not a crisis, it’s just a decision that the board of directorsmakes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You’ve mentioned a couple of times an Indian tribe. Johnson: Oh, they were called the South Utes. The South Utes are a branch of the oldUtes that lived in Western Colorado and Utah. I can’t give you the dates, butlet’s just say in the 1860s and 70s they were put on some really awful land,like our forefathers did with many Indian tribes, and that land had silver on it.So as soon as that was discovered, they kicked them off of that land and putthem on some even worse land! But that land had oil under it, and by then itwas too late to kick them off!  I forget, I think it was Exxon or somebody who discovered the oil there. Sothen they obviously began to have oil royalties, and it’s a nice story if I have itstraight. It may be myth, but I think it’s true. They had a very wise chiefwho’s called chairman of the tribal council, but he’s basically a chief in anordinary sense. He argued with the Bureau of Indian Affairs and said, “Wedon’t want to pass out all the money to these families every year. We want topass out half the money, so they can live, and then we’re going to invest halffor them.” Extremely wise decision. Well, I can’t give you the numbers, but they have a little under three thousandmembers of the tribe, and they have a few billion dollars of assets now fromhaving investment programs. So we hope we add to that for them. But wewent there to visit them near Durango, Colorado. Interestingly enough, someof the managers of the money are Indian Indians! From India, not AmericanIndians, just a coincidence of name. But there’s a tribal member that looksafter that, a manager, looking after the other Indians who are managing it. Sowe’ve had a good relationship with them. Not a lot of contact. We hope todeliver some really good things back to them.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is this a fairly recent association? Johnson: We call that fund the ’04 Fund, so it was 2004. I don’t think they mind mymentioning it since it’s a public matter, but we report to them every quarter.As I say, we have high hopes for them and us. I don’t know how that came up,because almost all the other limited partners with us now are people whoknew us to start with. One family in particular said—next time we dosomething could we get involved? And so we’ve done that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you’ve had more or less the same limited partners since you started out? Johnson: No, not at all. If you go back a long way in history, we had some universitiesas limited partners. Our firm, some guys left us because they wanted to bemanaging larger amounts of money and managing other people’s money. Thatwas Craig Taylor and some other guys. They left in the late nineties sometimeand formed their own firm called Alloy Ventures with which we’re quitefriendly and communicative. So some of those universities and other limitedpartners we had in an older fund. But I’ve always had this family fund calledAsset Management Partners, which did the investments in Eastern Europe, didthe investments in other venture capital companies, and for a long time wasour venture fund that we had. Only in 2004 did we start another fund that hadthese limited number of limited partners. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, maybe this is the time to talk about the Eastern Europe venture capitalbusiness. Johnson: Sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you early in the game in venture capital in that area? Johnson: Yes. The quick history of that is that Bill Draper, whom you’ve interviewed,and who was my business partner in a very early SBIC in the sixties, becamethe head of the United Nations Development Program—UNDP. And so in1990, when the walls were starting to come down in Eastern Europe andand ’90. He said a few months earlier, “Would you go with me on a trip toPoland, Romania, Bulgaria, Albania, Yugoslavia, and then Czechoslovakiaand just talk to the country leaders about building small businesses andventure capital?” I said yes, but the Polish part I couldn’t do—because I justcouldn’t do it. So I started in Romania, and we met with the heads of state governmentduring the trip. They were not my normal people to deal with but UNDP did.So we went to the last of those countries and made some subsequent visitswhen I was invited to come back, just personally. The UNDP was helping, sothey funded my trips. Then I realized after a while that they didn’t need [me]anymore—I made two or three trips. In fact, in Romania the man who becameprime minister asked me to be his advisor, so I made several trips while hewas prime minister to advise him about these issues—a guy named [Theodor]Stolojan, so I got to know Romania pretty well during those visits.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Had they any form of venture capital before this? Johnson: Well, not in the Communist era, no. [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: No. [chuckling] Johnson: They were lucky if they did not get arrested for selling applies on the streets.That’s not quite fair, but they didn’t have any businesses. I suppose peoplewere bartering and trading. You can’t really stop people from doing businessentirely. There were quite a few government-owned plants and governmentowned businesses. Then I visited the Czech Republic on a trip. Also in an unrelated trip in Juneor maybe July of 1990, I was invited to go to Russia, and I met with the mayor of the city then called Leningrad and gave a bunch of talks there, including tothe city council. That led to, a few years later, my getting involved in aventure fund starting in St. Petersburg. But getting back to this other trip—after about a couple of years of givingadvice, it was obvious that they really needed somebody to start some venturefunds. They had privatization funds, and they had people who were starting tobuy up government-owned companies and run them. Or they also passed outthe stock to lots of people, but venture capital seemed like something theycould use. So what happened was that a guy of Polish origins and three guys of Czechand Slovak origins came to me separately suggesting we start a venture fundthere. So I, without going through all the details, sort of jammed themtogether—unwisely, it turned out. We started a fund based in Warsaw, with anoffice in Prague, which would do deals in both the Czech Republic and Polandand Slovakia, which by then was a separate country. Czechoslovakia split intotwo countries way back in there. I put in some money. A firm called ABN AMRO Bank and EBRP gotinterested and they put in some. Then we had some other investors aroundhere from origins in those countries—Polish or Czech, and it ran along prettywell. The net of it all was that the Polish guy couldn’t get along with the otherguys—I don’t know why, they’re all Slavs, but they couldn’t get along. And itmay have just been more personal than any ethnic differences. BecauseSlovak guys can sort of speak Polish, we took the Slovak guy and put him torun the Warsaw office after the Warsaw guy left, and then brought some morePolish guys in and that worked out fine, that relationship. But the fund—I can’t give you the dates—it just finished up a couple of yearsago and made a few bucks, but it was never really successful. It didn’t losemoney—that’s something. So we paid off all our partners, and there was aslight profit, a very slight profit, so nobody lost. We started another fund, withABN AMRO. We didn’t even try to raise money from these people whohadn’t done anything but get their money back. That fund is now in its fifth orsixth year, I don’t remember, and it’s doing very, very nicely. But ABNAMRO, for reasons unrelated to all of this, has broken up into a series ofbanks and selling itself off in pieces. So they will not be participating, I’msure, in any future funding. Now the guy we brought in from Slovakia died about five years ago, so it’sbeen run by a group of Polish guys. So we’re about fully invested, and it’sdoing very well. Several months from now, they’ll try to pull another fundtogether, and I probably almost certainly would be involved in it again. I don’tknow whether I want to go to Europe four times a year anymore, but that’sanother matter. I like flying my airplane, though, it’s a good way to go.  80 Let me finish that up. The man I’ve been advising, who was the primeminister of Romania, left that job and asked me if I’d be involved in startingan investment bank there, which I did. It was sort of venture capital, and thathas evolved into more of a private equity fund which I’m involved in—apublic one with public shareholders. And then in Russia, I got involved with afund in St. Petersburg, invested in that, and was on the board of advisors there.It’s just wrapping itself up with pretty good success. Then I helped a biotechgroup of companies to win a competition to get some government supportalong with private money to start a new venture fund. But the private moneynever really came around. They won the competition of three out of, I think,about fifteen firms. But whether I want to be involved with that very much, Idon’t know. The private money never came around so the thing’s beenfinanced by some Russian banks and I’m not so sure what my role will bethere in the future. Probably not much. Then I got involved in Norway, which is nothing to do with Eastern Europe,and backed a venture fund there and one in New Zealand. So I’ve helped backother venture funds in the United States, helped them get going, especially inthe biotech area where I’m known. In Romania, Poland, the Czech Republic,Russia, Eastern Europe, New Zealand, and Norway, I’ve helped start funds inwhich I’m involved in each case [or] in descendants of those funds.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: In some of those cases, did you get the venture capital ball rolling, so tospeak? Johnson: Yes, I think so. We were early in—being early in is not necessarily smart. Butwe were very early in Poland and the Czech Republic. The only what I’d callnormal venture fund [was] in Russia for a while.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Your comments bring to mind another general question—the importance, ornot, of the infrastructure, or the geography, or the culture, whatever you wantto all it, in which venture capital is occurring. I’m surmising that a venturecapital enterprise in any of the countries that you mentioned must have beendifferent in some ways than doing one here. Johnson: A lot! [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, can you talk about that? Johnson: Yes, sure. Let me take Poland—the most positive case. Poland was never fullycommunized. They had private farming, a lot of private farming, they hadsmall, private businesses. I think the number was twelve people you couldhave. So it had kind of a running start. So they were sort of ready for the thought of private business, and private businesses got going fast. There weresome already there when we got there. But the emphasis here is on high technology—a group of engineers, a groupof scientists, some graduate students doing something brand-new intechnology. That wasn’t what we were doing at all in Poland. What we weredoing in Poland was helping people start companies where there weren’t anycompanies before. There was very little infrastructure to support them, and sowe created a lot of startups—or backed them. We didn’t create any, webacked some startups, some of which didn’t work. They were in things likehomebuilding and in helping computers be used by companies. One company that did very well took software and hardware from westernsuppliers, put them together, installed them in companies, and got a fee fortraining the people in selling the goods. That worked out very nicely. One wassort of scientific. This guy developed a new kind of a pipette. That’s more likewhat we do here, and that worked out nicely. We backed a pizza manufacturerthat didn’t do well—seemed like it would, but didn’t. We had, oh I can’t evenname them all. There was a kind of a Federal Express type of thing that didokay. We had a couple of software companies that were more like what wewould do here. They were of varying quality. We had one call center thatworked out pretty well for a while, where you’d call in, and we had peopletalking about products, and so we would have people that knew products well.So you’d pick up the phone and say, “I’d like to talk about soap,” orsomething—I don’t know, I probably have the wrong example. But the callcenter was pretty good. It had some problems but eventually succeeded. We did about twenty deals, but very few of them were new kinds oftechnology. Some of them were applying technology to modern business, thatthey didn’t have much there. Some were just creating businesses—liketrucking and transportation—where they didn’t have it before. So that era isover now where you’re trying—those economies are going on. Poland isprobably the most lively country, although Russia would have to beconsidered that too. But it took the Czech Republic and Slovakia longer to getgoing because they were at a dead stop. I’m not sure about this, but I think thebarbers worked for the state.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you had to start at square one with the idea of private enterprise. Johnson: Start at square one with them. A little bit like a relay runner grabbing thebaton from somebody who’s already running, or being in the 100-meters andstarting from the blocks. To the extent we made money in that first fund, itwas just about all made in Poland, and we had some losses in the CzechRepublic. Different guys ran the office so you’ll never know [whether] it wasthe people or the situation. But early on, Poland was by far the best place. Now Russia’s turned out to be lively. It’s a little bit rough and tumbleatmosphere there—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Rough and tumble in terms of the crime element? Johnson: No. We didn’t get influenced by the crime very much. We had littlecompanies with little money, and so there was nothing much of interest to thecrooks. There are crooks there, but we didn’t run into those. Rough andtumble business methods— A lot of it has to do with whom you know andinfluence and government influences and those things. We didn’t run into thecrooks. I’d have been very uncomfortable if we had to deal with them. Iwouldn’t have, actually. One of the entrepreneurs cheated us, but all the other ones we dealt with werereally normal men and women—not many women in Russia I might add—who we made or lost our money. We used a technique in Russia which is anold American technique of buying a lot of stock cheap and then lendingmoney that the entrepreneur doesn’t have. So you got a big loan and a littleequity. This guy—we paid off our loan and then he said, “I’m canceling yourstock. And we said, “Why?” And he said, “Well, because you didn’t give meas much help as you should have.” It was just an excuse for the real value ofthe company. So we took it to court and the court ruled in our favor.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You took it to court there? Johnson: The court there, yes. But the enforcement of the court order has not beenstraightforward. [laughter] So I don’t know what’s going to happen there, butnothing good. The guy was just—I’d call him an ordinary chiseler.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, whom you could run across in any country. Johnson: You could run across anywhere. Russia’s not that big. It’s about 200 millionpeople or something like that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But in geography— Johnson: It’s as big as you can get in geography, but it also has a lot of mineral incomeand resources. A lot of guys bought up government companies cheaply, bywhatever means they did that. I don’t have any firsthand information. So theyhave these billionaires types, and they are not very interested in venturecapital or starting young companies. There’s quite a wealthy group of peoplein Russia. They travel all over Europe—you seem them. There’s people with lots of money there. They buy all kind of airplanes, in their cities they’re bigdeals. And the old retired people live pretty modestly on old pensions. There’sa pretty good sized middle class there, but it’s quite capitalistic. It’s fullycapitalistic now. But they haven’t done what we had hoped in terms of makingsure that the companies that the government sold were sold in private peoplein an open and fully disclosed processes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. Well, let’s stop there. [tape change][End Audio File 5]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: We haven’t specifically talked about venture capital in the Bay Area, and whythis area has been so flourishing and fruitful. Johnson: Well, that’s been looked at by lots of people, scholars included. But I’ve gotmy own thinking. I think the most important single reason is the presence oftwo, now three, great research universities in the area—Stanford, Cal, andUCSF. But also, the presence of other important educational institutions thatprovide a great flow of engineers and people that aren’t scientists, althoughtwo produce engineers. You have San Jose State, a very fine school. SantaClara has a good engineering school and a business school. And so the totaleducational environment here has been very strong, not only in technology—Cal and Stanford have great business schools, along with Santa Clara andHayward—they all have MBA programs. So you have a broad spectrum ofeducated people, all the way from science through marketing and finance. Then the second factor is statewide, but it’s true here. The communitycolleges are an unheralded but extremely important part of our educationalsystem. So you have such heavy-duty training of technicians and technicalpeople, plus people who go back and take accounting, as my wife did, or takebusiness subjects that weren’t part of their undergraduate education. Sonumber one is the educational environment and research which is very strong, Second of all, people like to live here. The climate’s good. I’m going back towhen I was a kid—there weren’t many companies. HP [Hewlett-Packard] andI think Varian was going when I was a little guy. HP got going in the latethirties. But you have an environment where you didn’t have the strictures andstructures of back East. You had a much more open environment here, ingeneral, in the West. And we were independent. They didn’t pay muchattention to us, and we didn’t pay much attention to them back East. So youhad an environment of freedom and lack of having to do things the old way.  It all started with education, but then we had an environment here. FederalRadio got going in 1906, so there’s been a history of a low level ofentrepreneurial activity, and it made this area somewhat different. But thesuccess of HP, the concentration that Dave [Packard] and Bill [Hewlett] hadof building a fine company. I had Bill talk to my class at one point, and hesaid, “We never thought a lot about making money. We knew we’d makemoney. What we really thought about was building a profitable company thatserved the customers well and was a great place to work.” And he reallymeant that. That was an absolutely sincere statement, and they did that. So I think the idea that HP succeeded here spun off a few, but not manypeople who had the ability to work in other companies. Other people wereinspired by the model, so that by about 1958 or so, it was clear that there werelots of technical people, people wanting to start companies, and so the fewcompanies that had made it like Varian, HP, and a couple others, and WatkinsJohnson, some of those were just sort of the natural kind of things thatoccurred here because the people were here. I think people coming through during the war and seeing how great theweather was influenced people to want to live here. But there was very littleventure capital, so that wasn’t part of the success at that point.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But there was military money, the defense industry, particularly in southernCalifornia, right? Johnson: Yes, I’m talking about Silicon Valley at the moment. There were somedefense expenditures here, but the bases here were operational bases. Thesupport of research in the universities by the Defense Department and by thegovernment in general was an important factor of getting intellectualstimulation for both people and for independent ideas scientifically. It waskind of a snowball, an exponential effect with a pretty low exponent on it. Ijust think the people were here, and the environment was such that it becameokay to be an entrepreneur. You could talk about my son the doctor, my sonthe lawyer, but my son the entrepreneur became a good thing to be—or mydaughter. I moved here in 1940 when my father became the Stanford track coach. I hadlived in Des Moines before that, up ‘til twelve. So I early observed almost allof this up until 1950 when I moved away to go back East to school and thenthe air force and then I had a job back East in the steel mills.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right, so you had ten years in California.  Johnson: So I missed the direct observation of that period between 1950 and 1962 whenI moved back again, and that was a very important time. But during that time,a number of companies were started, and a pioneer venture firm called Draper,Gaither and Anderson, started by Bill Draper’s dad and two other men, backedby the Rockefeller family and others, set up offices here and began to makewhat we now think of as venture investments in technology companies. You have a copy of my chart already—you can see some of that history inthere very, very early on. In fact I started the beginning point of my chartin ’58, even though a couple of individuals were before that. So why the success here? Primarily the great educational environment andemphasis on science and technology, b) the lack of structure and freedom totry things and not have to be part of some earlier structure and then, c) just asalient firm like Hewlett-Packard that set the pace and example for everybody.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Would you also put in this mix a culture that is not risk averse, that is willingto try new things and try new things that fail? Johnson: Well, I think that’s true of the United States, but it’s certainly true here, andwe’re certainly influenced by being part of the United States. Now I gavelocal conditions. There are things that are present in our whole country thatenabled us to be part of that. One was, much more than Europeans, we’re tolerant of people trying thingsand failing. Maybe a little more free here than back East, but it’s part of ourculture to make money, lead your own life, not be too dependent on thegovernment, and have an independence from the government. It’s a bigargument we’ll have politically in the next months, I’m sure. Always we’llhave that. But self-reliance is part of the West. We have relatively low taxes. We don’t have the lowest taxes in the world, butwe have taxes where if you make some money you can keep it, some of it, andyou can reinvest it in your company. There are other countries with lowertaxes than we, especially on capital gains, even though our capital gains taxhas been lowered—there are countries that don’t have any capital gains tax.They figure you invest money, you take it out, you want to reinvest it, that’snot taxable. We won’t have that argument, but moderate taxes, an environmentencouraging self-reliance and building your own life and being responsible foryourself is a national trait. De Tocqueville pointed this out very early on.We’ve never lost that characteristic, and we should keep that the best we can. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why do you think that is? The easy answer might be is that the sorts of peoplethat originally came to this country were enterprising and obviously willing totake risks if they were going to go to an unknown continent. Johnson: I’m sure there are sociologists and historians who can tell you a far moreofficial answer, but our ancestors came and left behind them whateverstructure there was, and came to strike out on their own. My own particular ychromosome ancestor was named John Johnson. I know he came in 1635 andsettled in Ipswich, Massachusetts. He was one of the founders of that town. Idon’t know much about him. I know he left England, left something behindhim. He was a carpenter and all that kind of stuff. But he built his own lifethere and up in Andover later. I don’t know much about them, but I’ve lookedat all those generations. They’re just the people that built the country. I’m very proud of them—noneof them were big deals, though. They’re big deals in a town, say, but theyweren’t Cabots and Lodges and all that stuff, who did their job too, by theway. Mine were all farmers, carpenters, one forbearer started a bank inDecatur, Illinois.I’ve never spent that much time on them, but they were justmoving West and building lives and they’re typical— That’s the thing, they’retypical of our country, because they were obviously on their own, and theybuilt their success or lack of it. But getting back to what you said, I think we’re much more tolerant of failureor people being on their own and trying things than they are, say, in Germany,especially where failure, up until lately, has been a very difficult thing.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: These are cultural/social attributes that we’re talking about. Did you find thatwas a barrier when you went into foreign venture capital? Johnson: Well, we were breaking through something different there. We were breakingthrough the end of Socialism. I would say people were anxious in all thosecountries to get out from under the heavy hand of government dependency. Ithink it was a human trait, but there was more concern about failure than youmight think. Venture capital in Western Europe, which I was involved in learning about asthe chairman of the international committee of the National Venture CapitalAssociation, is different, because Eastern European venture capital was morelike American, with startups and people leaving jobs and starting companies.Startups were not as popular or as common in post-war Western Europe asthey were in [Eastern Europe]. But that’s because a lot of Americans like mewere wandering around, and it sort of fit people coming out from underCommunism and Socialism. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Would Boole & Babbage be a good company to talk about in terms of Pitchphilosophies of venture capital? [chuckling] Johnson: Well, yes. [interruption]. In 1967, I think is the right year—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That’s right. Johnson: Draper and Johnson assets had been sold off to Sutter Hill. Bill was workingat Sutter Hill, and I was on my own. A friend of mine in the city, he’s still agood friend, John Bryan, said that he knew a couple guys in Palo Alto that hadstarted a software consulting firm. They had an idea to build software whichwould be sold, or in this case leased, as packages to companies. Up to thatpoint, people with their own computers had to write their own programs—they’re called problem programs. They had operating systems that wereprovided by the supplier, normally IBM then, but they didn’t have programsyou could just drop in and do tasks. Well, Ken [Kenneth W.] Kolence and David Katch were the two guys.Kolence and Katch Audit was their little consulting firm. They thought thatyou could build two kinds of programs for the then-IBM computers that weregoing to be coming on called the 360 series. It was a brand new series. So theyhad one kind of program which would make computers run better and couldlook at and see where other kinds of programs were spending their time andthen give you programs that would help the computer run better to runproblem programs. The other kind was called—that was called—PPE,Problem Program Evaluator. And then the other one was CUE, which wasConfiguration Utilization Evaluator. It helped you have the right number ofdisk drives and put the computer systems together. Well, anyway, it was new because nobody had any kind of products like thatbefore. There was only one other company providing software, packagedsoftware anyway. The idea was you wouldn’t have to write your ownsoftware. You could buy software from others. Well, it’s common now. So toshorten this story down, I got together, myself and John, of course, whobrought the deal in, and Bill Edwards, another friend, and we founded thiscorporation from the Kolence and Katch partnership, and they called it Boole& Babbage—[George] Boole being the first person to create the logic ofsoftware and [Charles] Babbage being the first guy to invent a computer. Infact, there’s a model of his old engine down at the Computer History Museumright now. But we had nothing to do with them other than just to name the company forthem. So it got going and had some success, and we had the usual excitementand problems of a startup. I became chairman of the board pretty early on because I was the primary investor, and I worked with them much in the wayI’ve been describing: trying to give them advice and help, and trying to keeptheir enthusiasm up because it was tough sledding. IBM wasn’t in love with usbecause we were postponing people’s purchases of computers. They didn’tbehave badly, they just—Then another company developed some softwarelike ours and gave it away, but it wasn’t as good. So in the end, we developeda commercial model. The company became successful, ran into some toughsledding—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How long did it take to become successful? Johnson: How do you define that? Start making money?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, how do you define it? [chuckling] Johnson: [chuckling] I probably have the years not quite right, but after about three orfour years it became clear that the men that were managing it, the foundersweren’t really—they were good people, but they— So we brought in a guy—Ithink he sent his resume around—but he was a Harvard Business Schoolgraduate, a guy named Bruce Coleman. Bruce came in and became theexecutive vice president. But then the main founder, Ken Kolence and hedidn’t get along very well. After a while, it became clear that we had to makea change there, so we asked Ken to step aside. I said, “We’ve got to make apitching change.” But we were pretty good friends. He accepted it pretty well,and so we moved ahead. Bruce built a real good company there for quite awhile, then he left to go with a great big company because he got a real goodjob there. We had a couple of other managements, one other management that didn’twork so well. We got a guy name Jack van Kinsbergen who took it public andmade a good success of it. Then he left to do something else, so in the end, webrought in one of our directors to—because it was faltering a little bit. Itwasn’t losing money but it just wasn’t growing. So one of our directors thathad a strong success before coming on our board—Paul [Newton]—did reallywell. We got into network programs to help networks run better. We sold thecompany for just about a billion bucks to BMC after—from 1967 to 1997—thirty years. Talk about patience! [laughing] So you couldn’t do that in aventure fund. You could only do that as an individual investor, which I was.So we made out nicely in the end, and it was a public company. But then thestock went down a lot that we got. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: According to this document, which I got off the web, there was also a crisiswith IBM that left the company with a lot of mainframes that were not— Johnson: They had a bunch of products called 360 and then they had the 370. Weevolved our product line to fit those, and as IBM, as those big mainframesbecame less the main processing source, they became more like big servers.But our real business, in the end, was products to help people managenetworks.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I’ll just read you what this article says and you can, of course, disagree: “Asthe IBM computers on which Boole’s software ran evolved, the company’sproduct line started to become obsolete.” Johnson: We had then seen that and had begun to develop our network products. That’sa correct statement, but they didn’t become obsolete so fast that the businesswas suffering from that. It took us a while to get our network programs going,and then the network programs became important. That’s a correct statement.Needless to say that the company also transferred its attention to networkprograms to avoid the whole company becoming obsolete. It was a slow spot,though, that’s correct.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, and then it goes on: “An ill-advised investment in another softwarecompany made matters worse. By 1980 Boole was teetering on the brink ofbankruptcy.” Johnson: I never felt it was teetering. Who wrote that?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Answers.com. Johnson: Oh. Well, I think if we hadn’t been successful in the field of networkmanagement, I think we might have gone broke because our business wasdropping off in our other products. Teetering—what’s teetering, okay? Wecould have gone broke if we hadn’t done something, sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I’m not trying to poke holes in the history of this company. Johnson: Why not?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] Okay, I will. But I think it does illustrate another point—that youare willing to stick with things longer, somewhat because of your personality  90and your loyalty to the people involved, but also because you have greatercontrol. Johnson: Well, yes, I felt that we could make a success of the company. Bruce left for abig job somewhere else. The guy that took his place couldn’t do it. And thenJack van Kinsbergen did come in and built us into the network business. Idon’t know all the dates, but Jack took us public and then we had plenty ofmoney then and we weren’t teetering on bankruptcy. But before we wentpublic, and before we bought Jack in, I would say we might have been able tosee the handwriting on the wall, but we were doing something about it. Now the chairman of the board is a mysterious job, whether it’s an operacompany or a real company, because the company is run by other people. Butyou try to exert influence and give advice and be a cheerleader. You help leadthe decisions as to who’s going to be the management, and I didn’t make avery good choice after Bruce left.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You take responsibility for that? Johnson: Well, the board has too, and the board looked to me as their leader, and I wasthe one that suggested recruiting these other guys. I could have done a betterjob of that. I think I suggested them to the board. The board approved it, but Iwasn’t a dictator. They were letting me lead the way on who the managementought to be now. But I was right about Bruce, I was right about letting thoseother guys go, wrong about these other two guys, then I was right about Jackvan Kinsbergen, and I was right about Paul Newton.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Not a bad record.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Are there two ways of exiting? IPOs and acquisition? Johnson: Well, there’s a third way called liquidation.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Okay. [chuckling] Johnson: It isn’t too prosperous, you see, but if you have a company with lots of liquidassets, you could just pass out all the assets to people. But basically, take itpublic. Then two things happen when you go public, the investors usuallydon’t get any money out because you don’t have a secondary. Secondarymeans shares already issued being sold in the offering, so it’s usually just aprimary offering and that money all goes in the company. But then youestablish a public market for the stock, and after a decent waiting period defined by the agreement, thirty days, or ninety days, or 120 days, then youcan begin to sell your stock into the market. Now sometimes there’s asecondary component to an IPO in which you sell some of your stock as wellas the company sells stock. Not common. So the company gets money togrow, the investors get some money out of it at that point, or they can if theywant to by selling it in the market. The second thing—mergers—some kinds of acquisitions you get a lot of cash.In the case of the BMC they gave us BMC stock for our Boole and Babbagestock, and they took over the company and merged it into BMC and we gotBMC stock. A couple of years after the merger, the stock went down a lotthough, just in the marketplace. We always told ourselves, we got a billiondollars for the company, but we didn’t really. But it felt good to say that! Paul Newton and I have stayed friends over the years, and we keep track ofhim. He made, as he should have,some good money from that few years hespent there. But Boole was a good example of a company that became thirtyyears old that never really succeeded greatly, went through some growingpains—could have had better guidance from me. But we eventually made itwith patience, and with going public we felt pretty good. I could have soldout, sold my stock when it was public and got off the board, but I didn’t. I juststuck with it, and it was kind of a career—a thirty-year career for me. Itwasn’t a job I got paid for, but it was my job as a venture capitalist to lookafter it. It was a pretty good example of a company that didn’t fail and didpretty well, but didn’t become a big deal.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And also illustrative of your willingness to stick with things<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is there any inherent virtue in an IPO over acquisition? Johnson: Well, it keeps the company alive, and it can fulfill some larger growth aims.Normally you’re acquired by a bigger company, so that the growth may belike that [indicating upward movement] and when you’re acquired it goes likethis [indicating downward movement]. If you’re not acquired and you keepbeing successful, the growth rate can continue. So when you’re acquired,normally that’s the end of your substantial growth in your investment. Sothat’s the disadvantage, but it’s more risk—and sometimes they give you cash,so that’s really it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And then in terms of the company itself often the culture becomes that of theacquiring company, right? Johnson: Usually. Boole and Babbage disappeared inside of BMC. What they call ourproduct called PATROL is one of their major projects. It was a very good acquisition for them. I think it’s gone up slightly in value, not from when weacquired it, but after the dip it’s doing okay. I’m happy with it. We did theright thing.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: One of the big worries at the time that Roche acquired Genentech in 1990 waswould the enterprising culture be destroyed? Johnson: They didn’t acquire it, for one thing, they acquired 60 percent of it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Okay, they acquired 60 percent. Johnson: It wasn’t folded into Merck—Merck deliberately kept it separate.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Into Roche. Johnson: I mean Roche. [Art] Levinson, the president, is a very independent guy. I’msure that Roche is on the board and gets reports and all that stuff. But I thinkGenentech runs itself. It’s a good company and it has good people in it. I don’tknow the Roche environment, but it is not instilled in or injected intoGenentech.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Can you give Roche some credit for that? Johnson: Yes, I do. They didn’t try to subsume it. I wouldn’t say they left it aloneeither, but they just said, “Okay, we own a majority and you’re not going todo stuff we don’t want to do.” But I don’t know firsthand but I’m sure therehave been some times when Roche said, “We’d prefer you not do that,” or“Don’t develop that drug.” I bet because Art Levinson is such a good leaderand a good scientist that they leave him alone as long as he’s making goodmoney. Now, if their growth rate stopped and if Avastin had some bigproblems and things slowed down, the growth rate stopped, then they mightstart trying to be more influential. But since I’m not on the scene up there, Ihave no idea what the relationship is.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, but it does bring up the question about the small startup entrepreneurialcompany in terms of culture as opposed to the big, established corporations.Can you ever get a Genentech or an Amgen at a Merk? Johnson: No. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why? Johnson: You can hypothetically do it. You could set up a division, back it, and say,“You guys got your company. We’re not going to interfere.” I can see themencouraging people, incentivizing people, and encouraging them to beresponsible for their own division—and that happens. But it’s not like havingyour own company where you’re independent, [only] dependent on yourself,and the benefits of what you do accrue to your own employees and yourshareholders.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What has been your observation over the years about the entrepreneur as anindividual? I’m thinking of the corporation/startup dichotomy. Johnson: I guess I don’t understand the question. Do you mean how do I viewentrepreneurs? Why are they different from people that work in companies?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, that’s a better way of saying it. Johnson: Well, I think they treasure and love the independence. They love their feelingof being self-reliant, or a group bring self-reliant. They know that if they workhard and are right, in the end they’ll make some good money, which iscertainly a primary aim. But they also can live with uncertainty, they can livewith risk—they can sleep. I know people that can’t be in little companies—itjust makes them too nervous. And they’re not good or bad people, they’re justpeople. So you have to be able to sleep when you have no idea what’s goingto happen to you.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Don’t you have to put yourself in that same category? Johnson: Yes. Venture capitalists all learn how to sleep when things are going to hell.[laughter] George Quist said it best—a friend of mine who was a founder ofHambrecht and Quist. He said that venture capitalists sleep like babies—theysleep for an hour and they cry for an hour! [laughter] But I sleep fine. I’ve hadnights when I’ve been happier than other nights, when I was worried aboutsomething, but I really have been able to get off to sleep and get a night’ssleep almost always.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you think if you had been financially dependent on the investment wouldhave made a difference? Or is it just your personality to do your best andthat’s it?  Johnson: I don’t know. No one would call me low strung—they haven’t anyway. Butwhen Draper and I first started out, we had no idea if we were going tosucceed or fail. This is in the early sixties. I had a wife and four kids, a newfamily. I’ve always been able to cope with the risk even though it wasunresolved. But one night I never slept was a weird one. I was in Rome at the RomeOlympics and Russia—we were ahead of Russia in the final basketball gamewith a point, or something. Russia got the ball out of bounds after our lastwinning basket, and the guy stepped on the line and threw the ball all the waydown the court, and the Russian forward dunked the ball in for the winningbucket. And the ref didn’t call that foul, and I was so hepped up, troubled, Iwas furious. The American team was all—it was Munich, I’m sorry. It wasnot Rome, it was Munich. I couldn’t sleep. I got home and Cathie said—“Just calm down, it’s just a [game].” I said, “It’snot just a game, it’s the Olympic final.” [chuckling] I usually just go to thetrack meet. I don’t always go for the basketball. I love basketball. Nowadaysit’s hard to get in basketball and swimming and other stuff I like. But I alwaysjust go for the track and field, called “athletics” in the Olympics. But it wassuch a bad call; it was an obvious illegal pass when you put your foot on theline and you threw it in. The American team was really furious. They did abad thing—they didn’t show up for the medal ceremony, which I thought wasbad sportsmanship, even if they were justified. But I slept very little that night.I slept better than that after many other difficulties. [laughing]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, your sporting background has been a theme through the talk. Johnson: Yes, I’m a son of a track coach and my dad was an Olympic athlete and allthat. I like winning.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But you also seem to believe in teamwork. Johnson: Well, I’m a track athlete, so except on relay teams and when you’re scoring indual meets, I’m not a teamwork guy like a basketball team or a football team.I fooled around with those sports in high school, but I’m basically anindividual athlete.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I guess that analogy doesn’t work. Johnson: But I felt very much a part of a team, because we used to have somethingcalled dual meets where you’d score a couple of points and then you’d be Stanford against Cal and all that stuff. They still have that meet, but that’sabout all. So we had a team feeling, certainly a relay team you have thatfeeling. But I recognize teamwork, I like teamwork, but I also understandindividual contributors and how important they are as well.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You do seem to think that the venture capital industry is not just a question offinances or investment, it’s a question of involvement from the get go. Johnson: Oh yes. You can hardly find one venture capitalist who’ll say it’s a financialbusiness. I don’t think you’ve found many who’ve said that, because there’sso much more to it. If it was a financial business, I’d make the investmentsand I’d go play golf every day. I don’t do that. I should, though! [chuckling] .<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, we’re running out of time, so maybe we should move to your role in thetwo venture capital associations. Johnson: I would guess about 1958 or 1959, someone started the Western Associationof Small Business Investment Companies, WASBIC. When Draper and Istarted our firm, in 1962, let’s say it was a year before it was started—therewere twelve members. There were only twelve SBICs and we met for dinneronce a month.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Twelve in the whole— Johnson: In the whole Bay Area. Johnson: So we had twelve members. There may have been other ones that didn’t join,but it was a small number. Less than half were doing what you’d call venturecapital. The rest were real estate and stuff like that. But we’d all have dinneronce a month together in the City and talk about things and what we weredoing, and it was very easy to get in somebody else’s deal or somebody get inyour deal. We all knew each other. It was just a small group. In 1965 I was the president-elect of the Western Association of SmallBusiness Investment Companies, but at that point Draper and I sold our SBIC,which we had formed in 1962, to Sutter Hill, and it was one of the origins ofSutter Hill’s background, as you already know. So then I wasn’t a smallbusiness investment company owner anymore, so I couldn’t be in WASBIC.The Western Association of Venture Capitalists started sometime after 1965,having evolved from WASBIC. I became involved in that, became a director,and I was president for a term—after one year as program director. They make you be program director before you can be president so you get all thespeakers.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were they both mainly promotional organizations? Johnson: No. The WASBIC was just talk among ourselves about our problems ofgetting going. It was like any group that doesn’t know what they’re doing.They’re just trying to talk to each other and see if somebody knowssomething. National Association of Venture Capitalists was very clearlystarted to give us a forum to talk to each other, but [also] to deal with thefederal government on issues of taxes and regulation.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you lobby? Johnson: We lobbied a lot, sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And to what effect? Johnson: Well, you call it lobbying, but we were trying to explain to congressmen andto committees and to the press that the creation of small businesses— A studyhad come out of MIT about 1979 by a guy named [David L.] Birch thatshowed that all the net new jobs in the United States came from companiesless than ten years old. The big companies grew and the big companiesshrank, but the net new jobs— I’ll bet it’s true now, and I’ll bet it’s beenalways true. The Depression, that’d be a different matter. So we had thatinformation. We convinced a certain number of senators— We’d have dinner with them ormeet with them, and I did some of that myself, and convinced them that lowercapital gains taxes, or treating them differently from ordinary income, peoplecould invest money, take a risk, gain and then take it out and then reinvest it,that that was not the same thing as a salary.There’s a big argument going on about that now, actually, for a differentreason. Carried interest is treated as a capital gain and some congressmen aresaying, “Well, it’s compensation, it’s not a capital gain.” And this is not theforum for that one. There was an important area where pension funds couldn’tinvest in venture funds, because the trustees could have been held responsiblefor any failure within the venture fund. I don’t remember the year, but—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: 1978.  Johnson: Seventy-eight. That does sound right to me. We got that legislation changed,and I think I was on the board of NVCA, at that point. No, I think I was on theboard after that. I think NVCA had an influence, but not with me on the board.But they did change the regulations so that it made it possible, basically, forpension funds to invest in venture capital firms without being consideredreckless, because of the total exposure to many deals.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And that opened up a huge— Johnson: That opened up a huge amount of capital for venture capital firms.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Te early eighties were a boom time for venture capital. Johnson: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you credit the ERISA [Employee Retirement Income Security] Act— Wasthat an element? Johnson: Yes, it was. The ERISA Act opened up a lot of coffers for venture capital.Venture capital had a hard time getting noticed for a while. I remember acartoon in the late sixties in the New Yorker, where there was a couple ofprosperous-looking guys sitting in a club and one way saying, “Venturecapital—whatever happened to venture capital?” [laughter] And then Iremember students in my class saying, or one student in particular said, “It’sjust an anomaly. It can’t exist. It’s from a discontinuity in the marketplace.”So we had that discussion in class. I can’t give you the right dates, but WASBIC was my first affiliation in theearly sixties. Then in the seventies I think the next thing was the WesternAssociation of Venture Capitalists. I’m pretty sure I was president of that for awhile. And then I can’t tell you when, but let’s just say late seventies ormaybe early eighties I got involved as a director of the National VentureCapital Association and became the chairman of the international committee,[on] which I had a lot to do with building relationships with other venturecapital associations in Europe in particular. So that was that. You wanted to cover my class? You said you wanted to cover that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I want you to talk about your class, yes.  Johnson: Okay. So being a son of an English teacher and a coach, I’ve always thoughtabout being a teacher. I never did, but in 1979, or was it ’78 when it first cameup? A friend of mine had been teaching a course in entrepreneurship atStanford Business School, Greg [Gregor G.] Peterson. He was a Sutter Hillguy, by the way. He left to do something else; and they needed someone totake over his class in fairly short order. So he asked me if I’d go over thereand interview the associate dean. Of course, I was sort of fascinated by thethought of it. So in 1979, I accepted it, and I became something called a lecturer inmanagement. It was a paid job. I took the pay—it wasn’t all that much, but itwas 15 percent of an assistant professor’s pay, because I wanted to have therelationship, one of not being a volunteer. Somebody was hiring, and if theydidn’t like me they could fire me—and they didn’t. So I took the pay and Istarted off. The first year I just used some canned cases. Then I began to usebusiness plans from our own files here as examples.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Had you gotten that idea from Harvard Business School? Johnson: The case study, yes I had, from going there. But Stanford was a case-studyschool. I never thought about not using the case system. So I never thoughtabout having a bunch of lectures. The next year I built a curriculum mostly ofcases from our own files, and then I asked the entrepreneur in each case tocome to class at the end of the discussion to comment on the discussion. Butfrom pretty early on, because I was a venture capitalist, I told the students thatif they’d like to not treat it like they’re an entrepreneur but treat it like they’reventure capitalists and pass judgments on the deals and whatever they’d liketo do—the MBA candidates all love to pass judgment on things. So a lot ofthem took up that option. Then after about three or four years, another guy named Irv [Harold Irving]Grousbeck came from Harvard. He came as a lecturer on management. Hetaught the course differently and put all his emphasis on the entrepreneurialside of it, and I was putting all of mine on venture capital. So the studentswanted to take both courses. They didn’t like the explanation,“You can’t takeboth because they have the same number.” So I changed the name of mycourse from Formation of New Ventures [to] Entrepreneurship and VentureCapital, and I gave it a new number of Business 353, I think it was. So thenthat became a venture capital course, and it was the first venture capital coursetaught in any business school that I know of.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What year would that have been?  Johnson: Well, you know, it really began almost as soon as I began to teach. Let meguess, 1984 or 1985. I started teaching in ’79. From ’84 on it was a venturecapital course. I did the same things, but I’d bring in the entrepreneurs whowould then have heard the discussion. I taught one course per year of eighteento twenty sessions, and it was a popular course.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did teaching all that time and interacting with bright minds change anythinking on your part? Johnson: [pause] I’ll tell you what it did, it gave me a feeling that I should write a fewthings and I should talk about— It certainly led to my going to Eastern Europein 1990, because I was thought of as a partly academic person. So when BillDraper organized the trip, they began to treat me as if I knew somethinginstead of just being a practitioner. Being a professor is a really big deal inEurope. Here it’s respected, but it’s not like a class apart. So I was calledprofessor and all that stuff. They called me professor at Stanford, but really we weren’t technically—ourjob was not professor. We weren’t in the tenure track. The other thing I likedabout it was, I and the other practitioners who were teaching real estate andother things, who were doers, were treated extremely cordially andrespectfully by the rest [of the faculty]. They’d be in faculty meetings, they’dask our opinion and we’d speak up and people would listen.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you think that that has something to do with Stanford’s culture? Since thetimes of Terman, Stanford has been known to reach out to the businesscommunity. Johnson: I don’t know that. I think Stanford had an entrepreneurial course for a longtime. My contribution was making it into a venture capital course. You askedme about exposure to bright minds. I’m eighty now, so in 1979 I would havebeen fifty-one, so I was not a spring chicken, by any means. I taught allthrough my fifties and I was sixty-three when I quit. I think being with youngpeople, hearing new ways of looking at things, hearing how they view theirown ambitions and view things is always refreshing. I’m involved with brightminds every day around here and around my companies, so that isn’t [it] asmuch as being involved with young people who have new ways of doingthings, think new things, being exposed to the fact that the old way has tochange. Since I’m exposed to bright minds all the time, I don’t think that wasthe experience. The experience was in young, bright minds that was good forme.  100 It opened up so many things—it opened the Eastern European trips. Bill mighthave taken me anyway, but he could advertise me as a semi-academic. Andthen I taught for a couple of summers in Berlin—for one week in anotherperson’s course in Berlin. There they wanted lectures. They could barely bringthemselves to participate in a discussion like that. I’ve written some things,and one thing Hoover [Institution] published. So that whole academic side—whether it helped my venture capital career, I can’t tell you, but it sure madean interesting facet of my life.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did it open up business opportunities? Johnson: Well, because the students had to write business plans, I always passed themoff to other people. I didn’t want to be in the position of grading a guy’s paperand then sitting down with him a few months later and negotiating a deal. So Ipassed along to other people some things that did become real companies. I’venever backed a deal from a student. Then after I stopped teaching my class in1990, I usually take one or two students a quarter who want to write businessplans under my tutelage who hear about me or something, and I’ve had somefun with that. One woman, who twenty years ago I was her advisor, started a venture firm inBarcelona, so another guy and I are going to get involved in that as investors.But I don’t feel the slightest [hesitation]— That’s too old to worry about.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Your reputation from the few people that I’ve had the privilege to talk to sofar is that you are an extremely ethical man. Johnson: That’s my self-picture, yes. I’m glad some other people think that too! Let mesay this—the venture business was ethical from the beginning. With the guysand the women that founded the business, there’s never been the slightestsense of you couldn’t shake hands on something, or that someone wouldmislead you and not tell you something that you needed to know. I was onlyan example of a custom and a way of doing business in the venture capitalbusiness from the early days.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. But I think you were projecting a certain set of ethics too. Johnson: Well, yes. I contributed to it and I took from it. But I could name half a dozenother guys that I think of as quite ethical. I didn’t run into any problems. Nowin the boom times of the late nineties, some sidewinders did come in that wereso anxious to make money in a hurry that they cut some corners that the oldguard wouldn’t have cut. But I think all old guys say that! [chuckling] <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, Pitch, thank you very much for your time. Johnson: It’s been fun for me, yes! 
