Interviewer: It is June 9, 2009, and this is the first interview with Mr. Burt McMurtry. Mr.McMurtry, would you start way back with your grandparents on both sidesand tell me a little bit about where they were and what they did and how muchyou knew them? McMurtry: I’d be happy to. I knew one set of grandparents much better than the other, butthree of my four grandparents were living when I was born and I got to knowthem. My mother’s mother had died when my mother was nine. Mygrandfather [Burton Matteson] had remarried and had several children by thatmarriage in addition to the two sisters my mother had, and we got to knowthat family quite well. My grandfather had been an engineer working withColorado Fuel and Iron in Colorado. He was originally from upstate NewYork and was apparently a real mechanical genius, something that missed meentirely!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, really! [chuckling] McMurtry: But this is something that our son seems to have, which is delightful to see. Iremember him as a quite old man. They retired to the Rio Grande Valley ofTexas and bought a farm there and were growing fruit. We lived in Houstonand we would go down to see them periodically. I remember him as being apretty unhappy older man, really crippled up quite a lot, very bad knee troubleand arthritis, and so on. He died in 1948 when I was then thirteen, so I knewhim slightly but not well. My other grandfather [James Gilmer McMurtry, born 1870 in Judson, IN] Igot to know quite well. He had been a college professor in small colleges inthe Midwest and had ended up at Colorado College in Colorado Springs. Hetaught philosophy and Greek and Latin and German.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: My heavens! McMurtry: And other interesting things. He finished his career at Colorado College andthen retired in 1938. He was born in 1870 and retired in 1938 and they movedalso to Texas, where my parents were living in Houston, although they movedto Lufkin, a small town north of Houston. He became a Presbyterian ministerin his retirement and he did that for a number of years. My grandmother diedin 1943, and in 1945 our grandfather, my father’s father, moved to Houstonand lived with us from 1945 until he died in 1953. During that time he wasessentially helping with churches around southeast Texas. But my brother [James G. McMurtry III] and I got to know him quite well, which waswonderful. He was a very learned guy, and we would read our Latin lessonswith him and that was great fun, a great education. He would also point out tous what book this particular passage came from and how it related to otherthings that were going on historically. It was really delightful; I wish I hadmade some notes or remembered more of it, but it was fun that he wasknowledgeable and easy to be around. So that’s a lot of what I remember about both sets of grandparents, although Ishould go back briefly to Mr. Matteson, M-A-T-T-E-S-O-N [spells] BurtonMatteson, for whom I’m named. I mentioned he was a crippled, old man.About twenty years ago, I had an attack of gout—really bad stuff. It typicallyhits the ball joint of the big toe, and what happens is uric acid levels get toohigh in your blood, the uric acid precipitates out on the smoothest joints inyour body—that’s one of the smoothest—and it forms like sandpaper, whichis what produces the extreme pain. Not good stuff. My three-year-olderbrother had gotten gout about three years earlier. My father was still livingand we asked him, “Where did this gout come from?” And he said, “I have noidea—Oh! Mr. Matteson had very serious gout, and in fact what he had—hewas crippled with gout.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh was that it? McMurtry: And yet nowadays there’s a pill that most people can take called allopurinol,which you take once a day, has no other side effects, and it keeps your uricacid levels in complete control.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Amazing. So there must be a genetic tendency. McMurtry: Totally, oh yes. One of the main things that is known about that disease is it ishighly genetically transmitted.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because the image that you get way back, with the King Georges or whoever,was high living. [chuckling] McMurtry: Yes, exactly, that’s right. And a lot of that, it turns out, has been discredited,which I’m very pleased to hear about!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] You don’t want to be accused of that! McMurtry: [chuckling] Although we grew up drinking absolutely nothing, after we cameto California and discovered wine, we really got into wine, and so we drink a lot of wine! I’d really like not to have to give up drinking wine. That would beunfortunate.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, then—let’s go to your parents. How did you end up in Texas, or wheredid they start, maybe, is the question. McMurtry: They started in Colorado Springs. My father, James G. McMurtry, Jr. wasliving there; my mother, Alberta Elizabeth Matteson McMurtry was living inPueblo, Colorado. She came to Colorado College in the same freshman classas my father, and they met at Colorado College and became engaged and weremarried just after graduating from Colorado College. Actually, they married ayear later; they graduated in 1925, married in 1926. My father had trained as ahard rock geologist at Colorado College, but when he finished college, therewere really no jobs available for hard rock geologists.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that the Depression? McMurtry: No. It was pre-Depression but there was not much demand. My mother hadtrained as an English major and as a teacher, and so she taught school for awhile and then they were married and she taught after they were married. Myfather did some odd jobs here and there and then in 1928 he got a job inHouston working with what I call “Umble” Oil and Refining Company, H-UM-B-L-E [spells]. If you’re from Southeast Texas you don’t pronounced theinitial H on a word. I found that out many years ago in a funny way, so peoplewho are from Houston say they’re from Uston. I’ve learned to say Houstonbecause it got confused earlier in another context.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Or if you listen to the BBC, they say Hooston. McMurtry: Hooston, that’s right, or Howston. But my father and mother moved to Texasin 1928, and he had several jobs during the early part of the Depression. Buthe kept his job with [H]umble Oil, which was mainly sort of an accountingand paralegal-type job; it had nothing to do with the geology that he wastrained in.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that a disappointment to him? McMurtry: I think yes and no. He would have liked to have used his geology training, butit was not the passion for him that some people develop about scientificendeavors. So they were in Houston; we grew up in the southwest part of thecity. I have an older brother who’s three-years older than I who just retired several years ago as a neurosurgeon at Columbia Presbyterian Medical Centerin New York and taught at Columbia for many, many years.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You don’t have a trace of a Texan accent that I can detect. McMurtry: That is strange, and my brother and I sound alike. We thought for a while itmay have been a high school speech teacher we had, but I have a lot of goodfriends from high school who took from the same speech teacher who havepretty significant accents.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So there goes that hypothesis! [chuckling] McMurtry: Hard to know what produced that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I was wondering if you would have one, and whether part of being acceptedon the West Coast was dropping your Texan accent, but it doesn’t sound thatway. McMurtry: No, I’ve never been conscious of that at all.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Give me a feeling of what it was like to grow up in your family household. McMurtry: We had a very comfortable childhood. Our family was very middle class.There was certainly no abundance, but we were never raised thinking that wewere poor. That’s pretty interesting looking back on it, because my fathernever made more than $10,000 a year in his entire life, and he was makingthat near the time that he retired in the late sixties. And so you’ve got to factorinflation into all that, but still, it’s pretty striking that we could have had avery comfortable home.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And your mother was no longer working? McMurtry: My mother, no, she did not work after she started having children. She was afull-time mom and very influential with us in that she really managed toconvey to my brother and me a bunch of things. You had to be veryresponsible and all those good things, but also, she conveyed to us that in heropinion, which we valued, we could do just about anything we set out to do.There were no limits, and if you think about what you would like to impart toyour children, it is this concept of no limits coupled with responsibility and accountability and expectations that have to be in bounds, to some degree, butnot really constrained.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Where did she get that orientation? McMurtry: I don’t know where she got it, but it was deeply ingrained and came across tous as, I would say, total encouragement as opposed to elevated expectations. Itwas not a matter of—boy, am I going to be unhappy if you don’t achieve this,that, or the other. Or am I going to be unhappy if you don’t achieve what Iknow you can do. It was never that, it was all—you just decide what you wantto do and then set out to do it, and the chances are very good that you canmake it happen. Our father was by nature, I would say, a pessimist—a good-natured pessimist.He’d had some setbacks from not being able to get a job out of college, andthen had begun his family. Actually, he didn’t begin the family until right inthe Depression, and was exposed to a lot of uncertainty over the years andwas, by nature, pessimistic. My mother was, by nature, optimistic. Not a veryoutgoing person, in fact, rather shy and reticent, but fundamentally optimistic.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was there a lot of social activity? Were people in and out of the house? Orwas it a more nuclear family? McMurtry: There was some activity with distant relatives who lived in the area, and witha few other families who were friends of my parents, friends of my father’sfrom work and friends of my mother’s from some of the volunteer activitythat she was doing. And they had become friends with the parents of some ofthe classmates of my brother and mine. So we had a fair amount of socialactivity. One of my mother’s stepsisters came to live with us in the earlyforties, I think, after she graduated from high school and went to work as aclerk/stenographer or something for a local company and lived with us at ourlittle house in Houston, and so we got to know her pretty well over the years.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That’s a second generation doing that. McMurtry: Right, right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And did you go to public schools? McMurtry: Yes, we went to public schools. To the West University Elementary Schooland Pershing Junior High School and then Lamar High School, all in thesouthwest part of Houston. We were extremely fortunate because those were, by far, the best schools in Houston at the time. There were two good highschools, really good high schools—one was Lamar, and also San Jacinto HighSchool was quite good and the surrounding feeder schools were pretty good.But the schools were remarkably good. The quality of public education wewere treated to was really phenomenal and something we’re grateful for.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What were you becoming interested in in school? I mean was there an area? McMurtry: In school I was very interested in math and in science, particularly in the hardsciences—physics and chemistry much more than in biology, which neverparticularly interested me, which is very different from my brother. But I gotinterested in those things, but I was also interested in literature and I just gotvery committed to learning in late junior high school and in high school. Wewere blessed with some really good teachers who would challenge us andpush us pretty hard, and it was fun to try to achieve. So I was interested intrying to be a really good student and I got very interested in football in juniorhigh school and through high school, and that was a major passion and also—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Actually playing it, you mean? McMurtry: Oh yes, in fact I was an offensive guard and a defensive tackle, whichnowadays would require about 100 more pounds than I ever had, but I was bigat the time. I was in junior high school 160 pounds, and in high school I was6’1” and 180, which in those days was a big person so you could compete.There were bigger people but there were not the giants that there are today.But football was a great, great passion.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What about your brother? Was he blazing a path that you felt you had tofollow in any way? McMurtry: No, that’s a very appropriate question. I think some meaningful amount of thecredit for whatever I was able to accomplish in school was related to the factthat I would show up in a classroom, and beginning from elementary schoolon the teacher would say, “Oh, you’re Jimmy McMurtry’s brother!” And Iremember from the earliest stage sort of thinking under my breath—you’redamn right I am! And I’m going to do really well! And the idea for me—themotivation was to try to do better than he had done; and he had done very,very well. But it was a wonderful motivation, and I was very pleased that he—that’s one of the many things that older children do for younger children—training their parents and setting expectations and guidelines for the youngerkids as well. So it was really very helpful to do that.  My brother and I had a very good and different relationship, in that he’s threeyears older and, from the earliest time I can remember, thought that the idea ofarguing with or fighting with his younger brother was something about whichhe had less than zero interest. So he was totally non-combative, nonargumentative, highly dismissal of any attempts to be argumentative orrambunctious. And it was, I have to say, frustrating for me, because I wasmuch more aggressive by nature.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] You couldn’t get a rise out of him! McMurtry: I couldn’t at all! And so it was, actually, a pretty good education in learninghow to deal with people of that approach to life.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And are those very simple sketches of your two personalities—did they holdpretty well? I mean, is he still very even, and you’re a little feisty? McMurtry: That’s a good question. I would say they probably hold to some extent, buthe’s very outgoing and has very broad interests, and in addition to being asuperb neurosurgeon and teacher has developed a whole range of hobbies andactivities and interests that are very impressive. He the day after tomorrowwill be 77 years old and he’s a lifelong bachelor.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Really? McMurtry: Neurosurgery didn’t give him much time for anything. But he’s had a lot oftime to get very involved with opera and with antique furniture and with navalhistory and all kinds of other things.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Would you say that you’re close to him? McMurtry: I think we’ve always been close. Probably not the way some siblings would beobserved to be close, because we’ve never lived in the same place since 1957.But we see each other fairly regularly and have always enjoyed each other.It’s a very comfortable—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You’re lucky people. McMurtry: We’re very lucky people. There was the sibling rivalry on my part, in thesense that I knew people had expectations, and I did not want to do less wellthan my brother had done. And that was a great incentive for me. I think he never felt really challenged by me in any meaningful way, but I think was infact pleased at what I was able to accomplish, and I’ve been very pleased atwhat he’s been able to accomplish. I think probably people observing uswould say that each of us is pretty understated. That may be a reasonabledescription.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is that something that maybe came from the family? That you don’t broadcastyour virtues? McMurtry: Yes, I think very much so, very much so, yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So is the next stage Rice University? McMurtry: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And was that an inevitable choice? Did you look anywhere else? McMurtry: I didn’t look anywhere else. Again, this was the fifties, and if you grew up inHouston in the fifties and were from a local family—that is, maybe a newlylocal family, the fact that Rice existed and had zero tuition and was known tobe a high-quality school and a small school—meant that if you could getadmission to Rice, you generally tried to do that. About the only people whohad performed well academically in Houston that I knew who went elsewherewere people whose families had histories at Harvard or at Princeton or Yale orone of the other typically East Coast schools. But in my case it was logical tothink about going to Rice; I was interested in math and science and thoughtthat electrical engineering sounded like a reasonable thing to study.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: These were all fields in which Rice was strong. McMurtry: Fields in which Rice was strong, that’s right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How could Rice offer free tuition? McMurtry: They had a substantial endowment left by William Marsh Rice who had beena very successful businessman in Houston. He had come originally fromMassachusetts to Houston, and then as he was retiring decided to give hisfortune to establish a university. It was chartered in 1891 but not officiallyopened until 1912. There’s a long story about that because he was actuallymurdered in New York and the estate thrown in—it was a very complicated thing. But the school was kept small. There were only 1600 undergraduatestotal when we were at Rice.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Your brother went too. McMurtry: My brother went two years ahead of me, actually, because I skipped— Let’sgo back to that for just a second. I skipped my last half year of high school,which was one of the weirdest decisions I’ve ever made. I look back on it, I’mvery glad I did it, but I wonder how I managed to make the decision. As I said,I loved football and was very much involved with that and with academics. Iwas planning to graduate in January of 1953, but in the fall of ’52, after theuntil September of ’53 to start Rice. If I took extra courses in the spring andtook some summer courses, I could finish high school in August and start Ricein September. But that meant giving up my senior year of high schoolfootball, where I would have played absolutely all the time and had a greattime, but I somehow decided to do that and that put me on a path to be in theclass that finished Rice in 1952 instead of in 1953.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You also missed graduating with your class. McMurtry: Missed graduating with the class, that’s right. A couple of us who wereinvited, who had done well academically, were invited to sit in with the classwhen they graduated, but we didn’t. We didn’t get to do it till the summer, butit turned out to be a good decision.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now did you live at home? McMurtry: Lived at home, lived at home the whole time that I was at Rice, all four yearsat Rice.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that rather common? Was there a preponderance of Texans? McMurtry: At that time, yes, I bet 70 percent of the students at Rice were from Texas. Iwould guess, half or maybe a little more than half the students were living onthe campus, but certainly no more than half.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you didn’t feel a fish out of water.  McMurtry: No, it was very comfortable, and we got very involved with student activities.You spent most of your time there; the campus was only two miles away andwe got back and forth quite easily. My wife Deedee [née Meck] and I hadmet, actually, in high school. She was in the class that I ended up graduatingwith and had decided to come to Rice and was going to study Romancelanguages. We dated a little bit as freshmen, but then started dating again assophomores at Rice and then continued dating and became engaged and weremarried a week after we both graduated from Rice in June of 1956—in fact,53 years ago today was the date we were married. Exciting.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is that so! Definitely, congratulations. McMurtry: And then I had to go back for a fifth year because at that time Rice required itsengineers to go five years to get a BS degree. You went four years to get a BAdegree; your fifth year was all engineering; you got a BS degree. They feltthat that wasn’t a terrible burden for the students because it gave them abroader education, and since there was zero tuition from 1912 to 1965, theyfelt it was fine. It was delightful for me because you were permitted to takelots of courses outside of the engineering field. You got a lot of engineering,all kinds of engineering and physics and math and chemistry, but as anexample, the first electrical engineering course I took, which was my major,the first course I took from that department was a one-semester course in thesecond semester of my third year, which is a remarkable breadth for someonewho is studying that focused and—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Really! Yes, it’s not what you think of happening to an engineering student. McMurtry: I know. Nowadays it’s shifted back so that they have to cram it all in fouryears and there’s a lot of competition to do that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I don’t want to go there quite yet, but we do know that you are going to endup in engineering. McMurtry: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And was that in any way a handicap to have— McMurtry: Not at all. I think it was more of an advantage to have more formal training inby the time you got started. I didn’t know much about engineering, eventhough I was taking engineering at Rice.  The only jobs I’d had working in the summer were jobs working as a laborerin the oil fields, and that turned out to be really good for me because it wasextremely hard physical work. It also was really good for a kid who was doingvery well in school and who, as a result, thought of himself as beingreasonably smart. But to be faced with major construction-type jobs, dealingwith equipment, really practical problems, I found out— I started working inthe oil fields from the age of fifteen, working on a pipe-checking crew, and soon. I discovered very early that I lacked a lot of common sense. [<|endoftext|>
Interviewerchuckles] I just did not have the common sense that a number of my full-timecoworkers had.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because you hadn’t been out in the world doing things in the way that theywere? McMurtry: No, no. I’d been sheltered in school, but it was a fabulous education to workfull-time as a laborer. I worked on a pipe-checking crew, then I worked acouple summers in a refinery—very, very heavy-duty work, gigantic amountsof huge pipe—we were having six-foot pipe wrenches and things that you,hard to imagine— But again it was wonderful because it was fabulousphysical exercise and it was very different from hitting the books, buttremendously educational because you learned a lot about how to do things ina practical way.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, go back to your decision that engineering was it, that you were going tomajor in engineering. You said that you liked math and you liked the physicalsciences, and I can see how that’s related, but there were other ways you couldhave gone. McMurtry: There were other ways. I think I was influenced toward engineering by acouple of things. One, my grandfather on my mother’s side had tremendoustalents in that arena. His son, my mother’s stepbrother, was an engineer andworked and again had his father’s talent for building things. It’s almosthearsay. If you’re good in math and science, and you go to school and you goto Rice—it’s local and it’s free and it’s good—and you just do that. I doremember early on, it was clear to me when I got to Rice that my math skillshad been good through high school—they were going to be really strained atRice. It was pretty clear to me I was not going to be anything like a mathmajor, but not because I couldn’t do it, but because it was obviously not acalling for me. I loved physics, but I looked around at the relatively few people in our classand other people at Rice who were physics majors, and a lot of them werehighly introverted people who were—some interesting and some less interesting. But I remember thinking to myself, as I did the casual thinkingabout majors, that if that’s what a physicist is, I must not be one. Although it was interesting as I went through my training, and particularlyafter finishing the fourth year at Rice—Deedee and I were married—and I gota summer job with GE in Schenectady. So we drove up there, spent thesummer, and I worked in a microwave tube lab, the first time I’d been in realengineering work. I worked in a microwave tube lab and then also in aresearch lab and found that work fascinating and decided I really wanted totry to work in that field. I then spent the next year looking for an opportunityto work in that field and to come to graduate school at Stanford, which I hadlearned had the best graduate programs in that field, in the country, in theopinion of the people at GE with whom I was talking. That’s a long story, butI did in fact stumble out here.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, well, I want to hear it. But is there more to say about Rice? For onething, I know that you ended up being student body president. McMurtry: Yes. We got involved in student politics mainly because my wife Deedee hadbeen—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But she’s not your wife yet, is she? McMurtry: My girlfriend had been vice president of the sophomore class, and then in herjunior year she decided to run for secretary of the student association andencouraged me to think about running for treasurer. So I ran for treasurer andwas elected treasurer of the student association, and then leading into ourfourth year, we both decided to run for president and vice-president of thestudent association. And we were both elected to do that, so that was greatfun, so we were very involved with—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, very involved and very popular, I would think. Is that indeed true? McMurtry: Yes. Deedee was highly popular, and I was probably more well known thanhighly popular.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] You mean that feistiness came out? McMurtry: No, I’m not sure; I’m not sure. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, what else to say about Rice? Because I know the connections continue,so that you must feel very strongly about the place. McMurtry: Oh we both feel strongly about the Rice experience; it was a tremendouseducation and a lot of great people and the fellow students and the faculty andthe administration. I had the privilege of getting to know some trustees of Riceat that time, because when I was a junior, a committee was put together oftrustees, administration, faculty, students, and staff, to look at trying torationalize the dormitory system at Rice. At that time Rice had four men’sdormitories, and the general way things worked was it was a very AnimalHouse-type environment, typical of a lot of schools at that time. And therewere no women’s dormitories, even though I think we had 1600 people in theschool when we were there, and I think only 400 or 500 of them were women,maybe 400 were women, so it was very unbalanced.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that policy? McMurtry: No, the women had been admitted from the very first class, but I think theremust have been a policy to keep the number of women very much in theminority. Rice had no housing for women; they had some apartments that theyleased ten blocks away, which is where the women lived who were living “oncampus.” But this committee got put together and met for about a year and ahalf. Part of the committee went out to Caltech to look at the system of housesthat they have; part of the committee went to Yale and looked at what theydid. The committee did a lot of reading about what other universities did—theBritish system and lots of others. I was one of the four or five students on thatcommittee, but it gave me a chance to interact with some very interestingpeople in the administration, other faculty members I didn’t know well, andparticularly a couple of trustees—Herbert [C.] Allen and Newton Rayzor, whoturned out to be very influential in a lot of things. The recommendation of the committee was to establish what’s called acollege system, in which the colleges are not academic units but individualliving units where the students are randomly assigned from all the classes, andwhere there is a master, literally living in a house adjacent to the college.There is a master and family and there are resident associates from the facultywho also live with the college, with a lot of the social activity of the universityfocused on the college and competition between colleges, and so on, but withpeople from every major in every college so that it’s really mixed up. Thatwas begun in the spring of 1957, which was my fifth year at Rice, so that wegot to see the beginning of the college system. Now it’s evolved and hasevolved over the years, but has been enormously successful. One of the highlytouted features of a Rice experience is the depth and quality of the collegeexperience. We did recently provide funding for a tenth residential college at Rice; there are two new colleges being built, and we agreed to fund one ofthose. It’s literally being built as we speak.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because the student body has expanded? McMurtry: They decided to expand the student body by up to 30 percent. It began severalyears ago and we’ll be doing it for a while.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Enough on Rice? Probably you could go on forever! McMurtry: I probably could go on for a long time, but that’s probably enough.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I have two degrees listed at Rice. McMurtry: Two, yes. You got a BA degree at the end of four years and then a BS at theend of five.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. And then you went on to Stanford for two more degrees. McMurtry: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did it ever occur to you to go anywhere else? I’m imaging that Stanfordgraduate school at that point didn’t have the reputation of maybe some of theEast Coast schools. McMurtry: It turned out that in electrical engineering and physics, which were separatebut highly intertwined, Stanford had a huge reputation in the microwaveelectronics field. Russell and Sigurd Varian, who invented the klystron tube,were here. William [W.] Hansen who invented the klystron resonator and abunch of other important things was here. Hewlett and Packard had beenstudents of [Frederick] Terman’s and started their company in 1938. By this time, 1957, the graduate school of electrical engineering at Stanford,which was quite large and is still quite large, had become very prominent.Berkeley’s school, incidentally, had been prominent for a very long time andhad very good people in the microwave electronics field as well. But theadvice that I got from people in Schenectady was that Stanford was the placeto go if you could manage to get there. GE wanted me to come to work forthem, and work in Schenectady and go to school at Rensselaer Polytechnic [Institute], which is also a very good graduate school, but I decided I reallywanted to try to get out to Stanford.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because of all the reasons you just stated? McMurtry: Because of what I’d heard. I wasn’t thinking that much about going toCalifornia. I’d been to California twice only; I’d been to L.A. both times andhadn’t particularly liked it, so it was not that I had to get to California. But GEcould hire all the people they wanted. They had a microwave tube lab righthere at Stanford, but they could hire everybody they wanted locally to staffthat, and so I couldn’t get hired here. This is when I stumbled into a recruiter at Rice. In my fifth year I was helpingwith the fourth-year laboratory, left a laboratory building, left the vac[uum]lab, was walking through the area where recruiters sat, and there was onerecruiter sitting there. I was on my way home, but I wanted that recruiter tohave a good opinion of Rice. So I went over to be friendly and asked if he hadtalked to some interesting people, and he said he had and we talked a little bit.And then I said, “Does your company,” he was from Sylvania and I knew theymade light bulbs and flash bulbs—that was about all I knew. I said, “Doesyour company have any facility in California that would permit you to go towork in microwave electronics and do graduate work at Stanford at the sametime?” And he said, “I don’t know, but I think something like that may havebeen set up just in the last couple of years. I’m from New York. Let me goback and check on that.” And then he very politely said, “Who are you?” Hegave me a pencil, and I filled out an application and he took it back to NewYork. I got a call and it said, “Yes, we’ve got this program that Hewlett and Packardand the Varian Brothers had set up with Terman at Stanford.” And it was afabulous program [the Honors Cooperative Program]. If you got admitted tothe graduate school at Stanford, the companies gave you time off from work,nominally, and they did pretty much, to go to regular classes at Stanford,commute to those classes, and they paid you full pay for your job and theypaid Stanford tuition. In fact, those days they paid Stanford double tuition.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: My heavens! McMurtry: And you went to school half-time, that is, you went two courses a quarterinstead of four, but you went four quarters a year, and so in eight quarters, twoyears, you could get a master’s degree, and it was a great program.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did any other place—what about MIT, for example, which you think of beingat the top of the technological—  McMurtry: I don’t know if they had that kind of a program at that time or not.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And do you think that was Terman again? McMurtry: Absolutely. It was Terman—Terman and working with Hewlett and Packard, Iexpect, who wanted their engineers to be able to get advanced training butdidn’t want to lose them to an entire year of study.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you just thinking about the graduate program at Stanford? Or were youmaybe even aware that wonderful things were happening, and related to fieldsthat you were interested in out in the business world. I’m thinking of Fairchildand— McMurtry: No, this is just before Fairchild. Fairchild was also ’57, but it was before that.No, it turned out there was no business attraction to California. Silicon Valleywasn’t named until 1971, and all of our electronic instrumentation that weused as engineers at Rice was made by a Boston-based company calledGeneral Radio. I think we had maybe one Hewlett-Packard instrument in theentire laboratory.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that just because they were just barely getting off the ground? When wasHewlett-Packard founded? I can’t remember. McMurtry: Hewlett-Packard, established in 1938, grew slowly.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, so it’d been going for twenty years. McMurtry: Oh going a long time. They grew slowly, and then they began to get more andmore electronic instrumentation, and they didn’t become a public companyuntil 1957. That was the year they went public, and so they were known butnot widely known. General Radio was much more of a factor in electronicinstrumentation at that time. There’s another interesting story about that fromBill Hewlett, which if we have time we’ll talk about. But I wasn’t attracted tothe business; I was attracted to a very high-quality graduate program inelectrical engineering and the opportunity to go to work in the microwavetube field and learn about that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh I can see that.  McMurtry: And to be paid at the same time. I had to find a place where I could go tograduate school and be compensated for it because we had absolutely nomoney. I’d made some money in the summers; I could make $1000 a summerin the oil fields and had generally consumed that in covering a lot of my ownexpenses over the years, so it was important to—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you have children yet? McMurtry: No, we were married in ’56, and when we moved out here Deedee waspregnant with our daughter who was born on October 30 of 1957. And so Istarted Stanford in September of ’57, our daughter Cathryn Ann McMurtrywas born in October of ’57, our son John Eric McMurtry was born inDecember of 1960. I got my master’s degree in the summer of ’59, the PhD inthe summer of ’62, and I was working full-time. And Deedee was really asingle parent during that time.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You weren’t changing too many diapers, were you? McMurtry: It was unbelievable—but tremendously wonderful, fabulous educationalquality, fabulous work opportunity.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, are there people that stand out in that engineering program at Stanford? McMurtry: Oh yes, there are many. There’s a man named Tony [Anthony E.] Siegman, SI-E-G-M-A-N [spells] who was a young assistant professor at Stanford in themicrowave tube field when I joined, had been a student of Dean [A.] Watkins,who later started Watkins-Johnson Company, and who’s a very prominentengineer, and Dean was a professor at Stanford. Marvin Chodorow was aprofessor at Stanford. There were really some very first-rate people.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And you rubbed shoulders with these people? McMurtry: Yes, yes, got to know them, had an opportunity to take classes from them, andit was delightful.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you beginning to figure out where you were going to go with all this? McMurtry: I was beginning to figure it out. I had loved the microwave tube field andworked in that field for a number of years. And then when I was looking for aPhD problem, Tony Siegman had an idea for a device. The laser had just been invented in 1960, and so there were some ideas about how would youmodulate a laser beam, that is, how would you encode information on a laserbeam, send it someplace else, and then demodulate it. That is, get theinformation off the laser beam back into the form that you want to use it,whether it’s a picture or sound or whatever. And Tony had an idea for ademodulator that would be a microwave tube with a photo cathode, and so on,and wanted me to pursue that. I didn’t really want to pursue that because itwas interesting but it was too much like what I really knew a lot about doing,and I wanted to work on something totally different. I had built a laser so Ihad a laser that I could use, but Tony really wanted me to try to do that, and itforced me to think of a way to demonstrate whether or not that would workwithout having to build anything new. It was wonderful that I was able to do that, because I remembered somethingfrom Terman’s radioengineering book [Electronic and Radio Engineering]that said that almost all cathodes, the things that emit electrons in travelingwave tubes, in any kind of tube, most of them have some photoelectric effect.That is, if you hit the cathode with light, some electrons will come off. And soyou don’t have to put a photo cathode in a tube; you might be able to use anordinary cathode and therefore wouldn’t have to build anything, which wouldbe great.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because that’s time consuming and— McMurtry: Oh yes, it would have been very time consuming. And later on I found out wewould have been beaten to the punch by some people at Bell Labs who werein fact doing that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh really, if you’d stopped to make the equipment. McMurtry: If I’d done it the conventional way.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because Bell Labs is another place where things like that are happening, is itnot? McMurtry: Bell Labs was the premier research institution in the world, I would say, atthat time.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I associate Charles [H.] Townes with the laser. Was he at Bell at that point? McMurtry: He was at Bell Labs; he was teaching at Columbia and he was a consultant atBell Labs. And Arthur [L.] Schawlow— <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right, both Nobel laureates now. McMurtry: —two Nobel laureates, brothers-in-law.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Are they? Oh I didn’t know that. McMurtry: Yes. Arthur died a decade ago or more, but Charles is still around.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh yes, we have a long oral history with him. McMurtry: Oh, I’ll bet you do. He’s a fabulous guy. So I figured I could use this microwave tube I already had, and I had a bunchof traveling wave tubes. The problem was how do you modulate the light soyou can demodulate it? Well, it turned out that was going to be a complicatedthing to do as well, but it was pretty clear how to do it, you just had to taketime to do it. But it occurred to me that maybe the laser I had built already,which was a ruby laser, might be able to do the job. It’s a little complicated,but not too complicated. When you modulate or put information on a lightbeam or anything, you create what are called sidebands, that is you putinformation, the information goes in different places, and because theinformation goes in different places within the frequency spectrum—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: On the beam? McMurtry: Yes, on the beam, on the beam. It’s all on the beam. But you move thefrequency stuff around a little bit and the amplitudes, and because you movestuff around in the spectrum that is being emitted by this thing, if you knowwhat the code is you can go in and strip that stuff off, but you’re stripping offwhat are typical of sidebands, which are just different oscillations, oscillationsat different frequencies.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you’re going to have a whole bunch of information on the same beam? McMurtry: Yes. And what occurred to me was that the ruby laser, which is about thatlong [indicating size] had a natural resonance frequency that would cause it tohave sidebands in the microwave region, that is a few gigahertz, a few times hertz oscillation frequency. And yet it was “known” by the gurus of thefield that ruby lasers did not oscillate more than one frequency at one time,because ruby is a “homogeneously broadened medium,” which means once 20you get enough energy to start a laser action, then it sucks all the other energyinto that frequency and will only oscillate there. I’d been to a semi-private conference with some other Stanford guys andpeople from around the country, around the world, a month earlier and hadseen a spectrograph that some people had taken of a ruby laser. And this rubylaser spectrograph, which doesn’t say anything about the time, it just says thatall the stuff that came out of the ruby laser in this five-minute exposure, theywere different frequencies. But the people who gave the paper said, “But it’sclear it’s not more than one of these frequencies at a time, because what’shappening is the ruby rod is heating up. As it heats up it changes the naturalfrequency,” and sort of bang goes over into another one and then into anotherone and then— So that was understood, but I thought, what if they’re wrong? What if there’smore than one of these things going at the same time? Then in the laser I’vealready got, I’ve got multiple oscillations as if I had modulated the beam,without building the modulator. And at the other end, I may have a microwavephototube without having to build a phototube, because it’s an ordinarytraveling wave tube. And so I took this apparatus—I had the laser at Stanford; I was working atStanford. I took the laser from Stanford back down to the plant in MountainView, and in a highly illegal manner— It was a plant shutdown, so there wasnobody in the plant, and so I went in and set up this experiment, and thetraveling wave tube, it was using a 20,000 volt power supply, a very highenergy 20,000 volt power supply which you’re not allowed with other peoplearound. But if you’re careful— So anyway, I went in and started running theseexperiments and it worked like a charm! I mean this thing—it was going atmultiple frequencies all the time and very strong signals. So I called Tony, I called Siegman, and said, “I’m through!” And he said,“You’re what?” I said, “I’m through. You’ve got to come see something!”And so he drove down and was really ecstatic because it was a proof ofprinciple of something very important, well, very important— somethinguseful. I wasn’t through, of course, because then what I had was that themicrowave phototube was a device to study the spectral characteristics of rubylasers. And so I spent the next year using that device to study the spectralcharacteristics of ruby lasers with different doping levels, and actually not thatmuch as just with different temperatures and things of that kind.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And that was your dissertation? McMurtry: That was the dissertation. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, maybe we’d better stop there. Linda’s going to change a tape.[interruption in recording][End Audio File 1]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What we haven’t really talked about is what you were doing at Sylvania. Theywere in Mountain View? McMurtry: Yes, they were in Mountain View. They had two facilities in Mountain View.One was a microwave tube laboratory where I was working, and one wascalled the Electronic Defense Laboratories, which around that time was beingled by Bill [William J.] Perry, the former defense secretary who was also aprofessor at Stanford and a resident there in the complex. Perry was there, andI was in the microwave tube laboratory. From ’57 to ’62, I was working as anengineer on traveling wave tubes and backward-wave oscillators andwonderful electronic devices. And then I stumbled into the laser field, as Imentioned, when the laser was invented, and then because I had stumbled intoit, there was very interesting research to be done surrounding these microwaveoptical devices—laser devices. And so I went back to Sylvania, which hadbecome General Telephone and Electronics. General Telephone boughton. And in ’62, after I finished at Stanford, I went back and set up a smallgroup doing government-funded research in laser and microwave R&D.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that militarily oriented? McMurtry: Military—it was all air force or army.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you need clearance for that? McMurtry: Oh yes, you had to have clearances, and some of the work that we wereinvolved with in the microwave laboratory we needed top secret clearances,but it very seldom really needed that. In ’63 I went back to GTE and GTESylvania and set up this little group doing research and got very involved inresearch in laser/microwave-related things and built up a group called theElectro-optics Organization there, and had been building that and wasenjoying managing a small group but doing a lot of research. In 1963, GTEdecided to divest itself of the microwave tube business. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why? McMurtry: It was just not very profitable at that time, and the major peak of governmentfunding for that type of thing had passed. So they decided to divest and so atthat time I was faced with the question of what do you do? And one prospectwas to take the small group I had put together that had government fundingand set that up as a separate company.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And you could have done that? McMurtry: I could have done that and they would have blessed me to do that becausewhat I was doing was not critical to where they wanted to go.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. So they would have been as glad to spin it off. McMurtry: They would have been very comfortable with that. Another opportunity was togo back East to one of the other GTE facilities with whom I had a lot ofinteractions, and my bosses’ boss[es] were back there. So I looked at that. Andthe third opportunity was presented by Bill Perry who was then running theElectronic Defense Laboratories. He said, “Why don’t you bring your groupintact into our laboratories and expand the work to be a little more orientedtoward,” as opposed to device work which we were doing, “more orientedtoward government systems? And we’ll help you get some business in thatrelated area.” And after a long series of conversations with everybody, I endedup deciding not to take them out as a separate company, which was a goodidea that I didn’t because we didn’t have the basis for a— We were aconstructive group of people capable of doing research that other peoplefunded, but we were not—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Not running a business. McMurtry: That was not really a business in the sense of something that can generate a lotof capital. And I decided not to move back East, and took Bill Perry’s offer tocome over and move the group to [EDL].<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And not moving back East, was that a regional decision? McMurtry: The work would have been very similar, but there was a lot less disruption,because I’d put a lot of effort into getting the group together and really wantedto keep it together and probably wouldn’t have moved the entire group. There’s just a lot of dislocation in that. Also by that time we’d been heresince ’57, and six years it had been; we really liked it here!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, you changed your ideas about California. McMurtry: We were beginning to have some roots and really had a lot of relationships,business relationships and university relationships, and we wanted to stayclose. There were two small items related to that that ought to be mentioned.One was quite a shock. We moved the group over on January 1, 1964 andtransferred all the stuff, and on January 10 of 1964 Bill Perry called me and hesaid, “Burton, I need to talk to you about something.” So I went over to seehim and he said, “Burt, for a whole host of reasons, several of us have decidedthat we are going to be leaving GTE and setting up an independent companyin the electronic intelligence field,” which was his specialty, “and it’s going tobe called Electromagnetic Systems Laboratory, ESL,” which he and threeother GTE managers decided to do. And I was in shock because I had justmoved over there to work for Bill and now Bill was saying, “I’m out of here.”But then he was out of there and they went on to make that a very successfulcompany.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that a real break with GTE? McMurtry: Totally, oh totally. It was like the Fairchild founders leaving Shockley or theother guys leaving Fairchild, so it was a big break but they made it verysuccessful. And so I had to figure out how to make that work, and it workedfine, and I was with them for another five years until June of ’69. The other related story, a little longer but it’s worth mentioning is—Imentioned that I had developed a good relationship with two trustees of Ricein Houston—Herbert Allen who was the head of Cameron Iron Works, theparent of Brown & Root, who was a very interesting guy, and Newton Rayzor,who was an attorney in Houston, particularly in maritime law but had beenvery prominent. I knew him better than I knew Allen, but I knew them bothreasonably. I went back to Houston when I was thinking about whether to start a companyor not. I would need some money, and I figured I would need maybe as muchas $350,000 of external capital to be able to make this whole thing work. Andso I went back to Houston and went to see Mr. Rayzor at his home. Because Ireally hadn’t been in touch with him since graduating, I told him what I’dbeen up to and what I was thinking about doing. We had this very pleasantconversation and he asked me some questions. Then at the end of theconversation he said, “Well, Burton, I would be interested to hear what you decide to do about this. If you decide you want to start a company then myfamily and I would very much like to provide the financing to do it.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Just like that! You must have been impressive. McMurtry: Well, it was really impressive and it was highly empowering because it meantthe financing aspect was not some insurmountable mountain but wassomething that could be done. That permitted me to stop thinking about howwould you surmount the mountain and thinking, is this something I reallywant to do? Does it make sense to do this? And after thinking that throughpretty thoroughly decided no, and so I thanked him for the offer and told himwhat we were, in fact, deciding to do. And I didn’t really see him againuntil— This was ’63-’64. He must have died in the seventies. Mr. Allen wasaround for many years. I got to know him when I went on the Rice board in1986 or 1987. Allen was an emeritus trustee but still around in Houston, andso I got to spend a lot of time with him over the last years of his life.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But there’s a lot of years going by in which you’re not in touch and it seems tome that the Rice lifeline is pretty strong. McMurtry: It’s very strong. I don’t understand the psychology—but I think a lot of it hasto do with the institution being relatively small to begin with, so you did knowa lot of people and were known by a lot of people and could know a lot ofpeople at different levels. I got to know a lot of faculty members from whom Inever had classes but just were able to get to know. I was given a chance toknow these trustees and just felt comfortable approaching them. I think it’ssomething that happens with every great school and university; the bonds arepretty strong. You’re willing to give people the benefit of the doubt aboutalmost anything.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You have a Rice connection even here, and I get that from the paper that yougave. McMurtry: Yes, yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: There’s an inordinate number of Rice graduates who took the same trajectory,maybe for different reasons, to Silicon Valley. McMurtry: Well, I had something to do with that. It was fun. After we got out here andfound out how interesting the work was. And this paid educational experienceat Stanford was fabulous. I went back and started recruiting at Rice in 1958. Ipersonally went back and recruited primarily from the class of electrical engineers, fifth-year engineers. There were eighteen to twenty-four students ina class, and we would get a third to a quarter of the graduating class to cometo GTE. In the first year it was the microwave device lab for a couple of yearsand then strictly in the Electronic Defense Lab. And they’d come to GTE andgo to graduate school at Stanford. And so that’s really what led to thebeginning of a flow.And also, a number of people at Stanford in the late fifties/early sixtiesdiscovered the Stanford Business School. And so people like Tom Kelley anda number of other people came out to the business school and it started moreof a flow. There has always, since then, been a strong flow of Riceundergraduates who come to graduate school at Stanford, either inengineering or in business or in other fields. One of the first successful companies I was associated with was ROLMCorporation, R-O-L-M [spells] which was a very prominenttelecommunications company started in the late sixties and was named forGene Richeson, Ken [M. Kenneth] Oshman, Walter Loewenstern, [Jr.] andBob [Robert R.] Maxfield. And I had hired three of the four at different times.Actually Ken Oshman and Richeson had been classmates, and I’d hiredLowenstern earlier and tried like crazy to hire Maxfield, who was the top guyin the class after Oshman’s class but he went to IBM instead which made mevery unhappy. [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Your Rice connections are certainly paying off, aren’t they? McMurtry: The Rice connections are strong. That’s right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So the next step, and you correct me please—are you leaping off into thebeginnings of venture capital? I’m thinking of the Palo Alto InvestmentCompany? McMurtry: Well, actually, from ’64, January ’64 when I moved the group over to EDL,until pretty much through much of ’68, I was steaming along doing laser andlaser systems-related research and development and building a group andto ’67. I was still doing some research myself but also managing a smallgroup, but never more than fifty people or something like that. But then in ’67, I was asked if I would take a job running the EquipmentEngineering Laboratory for EDL, the group that I was a part of. But we were afunny little part doing laser stuff and this was the main business. I was askedif I would take over as manager of this group. I really wasn’t very interested init; it was a big job and a hard job because they’d lost a lot of their key people in the last couple of years because Perry’s company had been very successfuland was still hiring good people out of GTE. Also I liked what I was doing.But after the third time I was asked to do it—I was asked by my boss’s boss ifI would step in and run the Equipment Engineering Laboratory, and he said itwas important to him personally that I do that. About that time, even thedensest people get the idea that this is something they really want you to do,and if you don’t do it you’re making a statement that you better be prepared tomake if you really don’t want to do it, but you probably ought to think aboutdoing this. And so I agreed to do it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: With some reluctance? McMurtry: Yes, but having once— I think this may have come from our mother as well—I think I’ve always been able to convince myself that I like doing what I’mdoing, almost all the time. And I think the rationale is you’re probably goingto do a lot better job if you think you like it than if you think it’s a lot of workand I’ll do this just as long as I have to do it. I sort of go into everything as ifit’s all I’m ever going to be doing. So I took that attitude toward that job, and it was a mess. There were 400people, 400 employees, they’d lost a lot of key people recently and over theyears, and they had really been quite badly led, almost not led at all. And I hadnever managed anything big and didn’t have many good ideas about how todo it other than some common sense, a lot of which evolved more from my oilfield experiences with people than they did from any theory about how youmanage something, because I’d never read any of that. So I started workingwith the people and found that, fortunately, the group still had anexceptionally large number of very talented people, but they’d been badly led. And so I started trying to figure out who were the potential leaders amongthem who could be given more responsibility, and how could we attract someother people as leaders from the outside, to help put this together. And so Iworked on it really intensely, and the organization had to grow. The companyhad won a lot of new business, so they had commitments for products theyneeded to be able to make, engineer, deliver, and maintain. So the groupneeded to grow from 400 people to 500 in the period of about a year, andfigure out how to get projects back on schedule and so on. It was a nightmarebut a really useful experience for somebody who needed to know somethingabout real business.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And I imagine for later on. McMurtry: And for later on it was really valuable. And so I did that and brought a coupleof people in from the outside, promoted people internally, and had the most delightful experience in that I think fifteen months later the group was runningreally well. My boss, who had been my boss’s boss, was very happy withwhat was there and I said, “Would it be all right with you if I went back tofocusing on this funny little stuff? It’s up to you but I would put either thisguy or this guy in charge, in my job. And frankly, I’d probably take the otherone and put him in charge of another position at the same level in anothergroup that needed some leadership.” And he said, “Let’s do it.” So I went back to this Electro-optics Organization it was called, that hadmaybe a maximum of eighty people in it in ’68-’69. But then I was back inthat, and I was enjoying it and with pretty much a hand-picked team and doinginteresting work. But I had a real problem beginning in ’68 because itoccurred to me that although I liked what I was doing, I didn’t want to keepworking for a big company. And if I wanted to work for a big company Iwould have kept working for them because they treated me really well; I’dbeen given a lot of opportunity and responsibility and [was] well compensatedand all that. But I didn’t want to work for another big company. But I wasalways so busy doing what I was doing that I didn’t have time to think aboutwhat I would do if I weren’t doing what I was doing. And I found that veryfrustrating.People interviewed me about coming to be the number two person at somelittle company in the Valley at that time, and I talked to people about that. Igot a little exposure to the venture capital business through that route, and Iwas talking to people and thinking. I thought about starting a company, butsome of what I was doing at GTE could have been spun out as a company butin this case they were interested in having it. It was not like earlier when itwas sort of an adjunct. And I’d been treated very well; it didn’t seem to meappropriate to take what I was doing for them and just do it separately. And soit was not clear what to do!At that time I met Jack Melchor who had started a couple of companiessuccessfully here. One—Melabs in 1956, one HP Associates as a joint venturewith Hewlett-Packard in 1961.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now before you get too far, say a little bit for the record about where he camefrom, what his background was, please. McMurtry: Jack is originally from North Carolina. He had gotten a bachelor’s and amaster’s in physics from the University of North Carolina, had then been inthe navy during World War II, and then after World War II went to NotreDame and got a PhD in physics at Notre Dame in the microwave field. Andin ’53 he came out to— His first job after the PhD was in Mountain Viewworking for Sylvania in their Electronic Defense Laboratories. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you ran into him there. McMurtry: I didn’t know him there because he left. Jack came to Sylvania in ’53 and heleft in ’56 to start Melabs. I didn’t come till ’57.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you missed him by a year. McMurtry: That’s right. I missed him by a year.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But had he left a history behind him. Was his name floating around? McMurtry: His name was floating around and I’d met him. He was running HPAssociates, which was a joint venture with Hewlett-Packard that he sold out toHP completely in ’65. And then Dave Packard asked him if he would run thenascent computer group at HP. And so he agreed to do that and was doing thatand had interesting people working for him. Bill [William H.] Davidow wasworking for him and later became Intel Marketing and then Mohr Davidow.Tom Perkins of Kleiner Perkins was working for him.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh really. McMurtry: A bunch of interesting characters. But Jack had some medical problems at HP.He actually hyperventilated. They thought he had a heart attack, which wasscary, but hyperventilation is even scarier if they give you oxygen, which theydid, which can really give you trouble. He, having had that experience in thesummer of ’68 said, “I don’t think I’m going to work this hard.” And so hewas looking around for something different to do. We’d been introducedin ’68 because some people who wanted to start a company, wanted both Jackand me to get involved, and the four of us had met. Then Jack and I talkedafterwards and our conclusion was those two guys should just go do it; theydon’t need either one of us. They could use some encouragement maybe, butthere’s not a role for either one of us. So we agreed with that and we sort ofkept in touch. And then in early ’69 Jack decided he wanted to set up a seedcapital venture capital operation.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now how did he come to that idea? McMurtry: Well, he had done some venture investing. He’d been doing it on his own,helping entrepreneurs out over the years. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. With his own money. McMurtry: With his own money and had made good money doing that. And he’d startedtwo of his own companies and he said, “That’s something that I’d like to do.”And so keep it small. So he decided to set up a seed capital venture capital[Palo Alto Investment Company] operation headquartered in Los Altos in alittle building he owned, upstairs in an apartment, actually, and asked me, inthe spring of ’69 if I would join him and another guy from HP who hadworked for him there; the three of us were going to form a team together.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now why did he think of you? McMurtry: He thought of me because he had been— He’d heard a lot of good thingsabout me from other people who he had some confidence in, and I think theinteractions that he and I had had in looking at this company where peoplewanted us to get involved, and a couple of other conversations that we hadhad just impressed him that I was a bright, young guy and somebody that hecould probably work with.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But why would he think that you— So far you had been— McMurtry: I had no entrepreneurial [experience].<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And certainly no venture capital experience, per se. McMurtry: No, no.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You’d been either managing or doing research. McMurtry: That’s right. I had very limited management experience.Jack is a very intuitive character, and has more than once shown the ability toback some people. The ROLM case was a great example. The ROLM guyshad decided to leave in ’68 and started looking for financing. Ken Oshman,who was working for somebody who worked for me at that time, had come totell me that they were doing this, because whatever they were going to do wastotally non-competitive with what GTE was doing. And we tried really hard tokeep them at GTE because they were such good people, but also we were notgoing to get in their way if they got it financed and could do it. So Jack 30Melchor decided to be a co-founder with them of ROLM and he providedinitial funding plus a big loan that was repaid later.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And this is still his own money? Or does he have a fund by now? McMurtry: Strictly his own money, strictly his own money. So he backed these guys todevelop a ruggedized minicomputer. These are the days of mini-computersand Digital Equipment and Data General and a bunch of other companies.These guys were going to ruggedize the Data General computer to have astandard minicomputer that can be sold into ruggedized environments that themilitary might buy, as opposed to having to reinvent one of these things all thetime and pay them much more for it and have it be less reliable and lessmaintainable.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What about the mini part of it though? Aren’t we talking about hugecomputers at this stage? McMurtry: No, these were tabletop computers. This was the field that had been pioneeredby Digital Equipment Corporation and then later by companies like DataGeneral and others that became the second big wave of computing before themicrocomputer hit, before the personal computer hit.Jack looked at Richeson, Oshman, Loewenstern, and Maxfield. Maxfield wasthe only guy who had any experience in the computer field at all. He had threePhDs from Stanford and a master’s from Stanford and practically no businessexperience. Yes, they’d worked here and there, at GTE and so on, and Jacksaid, “I’m going to back these guys.” But he didn’t just back them; he backedthem, and then they put together a three-person board with Ken Oshman, JackMelchor, and John [Arnot] Wilson of Wilson Sonsini [Goodrich and Rosati].And Jack spent a lot of time mentoring these guys, not mentoring in the senseof saying, “Here’s what I would do.” But rather “Call me about anything—let’s talk about anything. If I don’t like what I see about what’s going on I’lllet you know.” He just turned out to be a very valuable mentor.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Meaning more in how you manage a business rather than what you’re doingwith your research? McMurtry: Yes, oh yes, much more on the business, much more.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because research wasn’t his forte. McMurtry: That’s right. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I have a note that there were four Rice graduates who also had degrees fromStanford. McMurtry: All four were Rice undergraduates who went on to get at least a master’sdegree at Stanford. And three of them received PhDs at Stanford.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you know them as well? McMurtry: Three had worked for me at GTE.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh okay. McMurtry: And one was the one I tried to hire and went to IBM instead.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I read that Arthur Rock was given the opportunity to invest and rejected it.This I got from John [W.] Wilson’s book [The New Venturers: Inside theHigh-Stakes World of Venture Capital]. He paraphrases Arthur Rock to saysomething like, what are you people doing trying to produce so many differentproducts? McMurtry: Well, their initial business plan was, in fact, multiple products and was a realzoo. Jack helped them narrow that down. He said, “I think I’m going to backyou guys, but we’re only going to do one thing.” I think when Arthur saw it, itwas much less focused. But Arthur’s reaction was highly rational, in that thesepeople were very, very inexperienced indeed. They may be bright and able buthad essentially no experience at the kind of thing they were setting out to do.But they did set out to do it in a highly focused manner, which is one ofMelchor’s greatest traits, and then did it exceptionally well. They not only didthat, but they got the company profitable and growing in the ruggedminicomputer business. Then in ’73, they decided they were going to go into anew business, namely the telephone PBX [private branch exchange] business.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why? McMurtry: They were going to build the first fully electronic computer-controlledtelephone switch, not for central offices but for remote sites for businesses andso on. And so they set out to develop this thing. They were still a privatecompany. I remember thinking these guys are crazy! Because that is aminefield of failed companies and big companies dominating it. But the moreI looked at it and talked with them about what they were doing, I got intrigued by it and I spent a lot of time evaluating it in 1975. They were about ready tointroduce their product in the summer of ’75. I spent a lot of time looking at itand concluded this thing could really work. I decided to get our fund, whichwe had then set up in ’74 called Institutional Venture Associates—we decidedto invest in ROLM.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that largely at your behest? McMurtry: It was largely at my behest, but because I was already a shareholder inROLM, because of my personal investment and involvement with Palo AltoInvestment Company, I was in a totally conflicted position, absolutelyconflicted. So I went to my partners—Reid Dennis, Burge Jamieson, andJames P. [Jim] Norris—and said, “I really think this is something very, veryinteresting that we ought to think about doing. But because I’m an investor Ican’t be a part of the decision. So I’ve done a lot of work on it; here’s thework that I’ve done. I’m willing to work on it if we decide to do it, but if wedecide to do it it’s got to be something you all decide because we can’toperate any other way.” And they looked at it hard, and after looking at it harddecided that we wanted to invest, and we did and I went on the board of thecompany.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All right, but we need to backtrack [chuckling], because what happens next isthe Palo Alto Investment Company. McMurtry: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now was that founded around ROLM? McMurtry: No, no, no, no, no.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I should just ask you an open-ended question. How did that come to be? McMurtry: That came about because Jack founded it in about June of ’69, whichhappened to be the same month that ROLM was founded. But Palo AltoInvestment Company had nothing to do with ROLM initially. Jack had apersonal investment in ROLM and was a director. But then he set up this littleseed capital venture capital company called Palo Alto Investment Company.Don Smith and I were the two employees of that company, working with Jack.And also Lowell [W.] Morse who was in the same office, because Lowell wasJack’s personal business manager, and so it was all of us worked on this. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now this is very early on. Were you calling what you were doing venturecapital? McMurtry: Yes, yes. We called it venture capital, but you can look around. There were afew people who were in the business and calling it that. The Draper, Gaither& Anderson people had been around, and Sutter Hill<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: As I remember, Draper, Gaither & Anderson was founded in 1969. McMurtry: Fifty-nine.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You’re right. I’m a decade behind. McMurtry: And then Sutter Hill, I think started in ’64.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, so it was not quite as early as I was thinking. McMurtry: Arthur Rock and Tommy [Thomas J.] Davis had done— Well, actually,Tommy started Mayfield in ’69 after we had started. But Tommy had beenwith Kern County Land Company doing venture capital. No, wait, back up.He had been with Kern County Land [Company] where he backed things likeWatkins-Johnson in the late fifties. Then he and Arthur Rock put together theDavis & Rock partnership in 1961, that ran from ’61 to ’69 and had thesegreat investments.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That was my mistake. I was a decade off. McMurtry: So we started Palo Alto Investment Company which was some of Jack’smoney, and any money that we could invest. We had saved some money, andwe took all the money we had saved and put it into this. We also could borrowsome money that Jack guaranteed, which was wonderful. So we put that in aswell. And we also had several million dollars that Jack had arranged throughhis friend William J. [Bill] Swanson, who was a local broker. One ofSwanson’s client’s friends was a Saudi guy who later gained a lot of notoriety.His name was Adnan Khashoggi. Adnan was interested in investing in someof these things and got some other people from the Saudi family to invest. Sothere was a total of about $3 million that could be invested.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that a big sum in those days?  McMurtry: No, but $3 million was a useful sum because a typical investment would be$50,000-$100,000, and then you could follow it all up; you could make a lotof investments. But many of the people who were doing venture at the timewere doing it as individuals. Pitch Johnson had started Draper Johnson firstand then decided to do his own thing. Draper did Sutter Hill, and Pitch didwhat became Asset Management. Reid Dennis was working for AmericanExpress and Fireman’s Fund but had started doing ventures on the side,initially, and then got them into it as corporations. Bill Bowes was doing it.Reid Dennis, Bill Edwards, John Bryan, Bill Bowes had all known each otherfor years and had a little investment club.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is that The Group? McMurtry: I don’t know what that was—I don’t know that they had a name for it. We’llhave to ask. Bill Edwards would [know].<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I think Reid Dennis said that too. McMurtry: It was a very casual group that got together and made private investments, soa lot of it was being done that way.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, maybe talk about Khashoggi. Had the Saudi family been investing allalong? McMurtry: No, I think this was a relatively new thing and more [that] Khashoggi knewsome people here, and Swanson knew one of the guys who knew Khashoggi.This was not a big deal for them but just something that they wanted to do,and so they put some money into it, although it took forever for anything goodto happen. There’d been a big boom in the public markets. In ’66 to ’68 it hadcrashed and ’69 was a tough time. And ’69 on was a punishing time to be inthe venture business because there was hardly any money around for ventures,and it was also just a slow time for business. There were almost no publicofferings. The first public offering I was associated with was in 1976, and thatwas ROLM. And then they sold below their offering price for the first fifteenmonths they were public.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You’ve got the oil crisis in there too, 1973. McMurtry: Yes, the ’73 thing—that was incredible. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Does that have any resonance with what’s going on now? McMurtry: It may. I know that having gone in the venture business, invested all themoney we had to invest, borrowed money that I couldn’t then justify havingborrowed, and then not seeing a single dollar back from a successfulinvestment for six years and two months was a painful thing. It was morepatience than I had, but it was actually a very constructive thing to have livedthrough. I think the main reason is that you learn a lot about the business ifyou’re in that much trouble. We did sixteen total startups in four years andlost money on half of them and lost all of our money on half of them. And we only had a few winners. I.I. Industries was the first one that returnedanything. It was a nice return in August of ’75, and then ROLM went publicin ’76 but didn’t generate a lot of value until ’78. And then it was huge value!If you’d bought at the public offering of ROLM in ’76, by the time theywere—a few years later than that, or when they sold to IBM in ’84, you gotforty times your money. Which was a huge return.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now all that period of nothing much happening—do you count that up to theeconomic climate? Or was it more than that? Could it also be somewhat tiedinto what you don’t yet know about investment? McMurtry: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And analyzing the potential of a business and all those things that go into it? McMurtry: Some of it is. But I think particularly in those days, the venture business was athing sort of unto itself, in that we were starting funny little companies, andvery few of these companies really got very big. And so there were a lot ofbusiness fundamentals that you had to be very concerned about. The mostimportant one was if you’ve got a product, or you need to develop a product,what customer need is there that is going to be satisfied by this product? Andis it going to be satisfied at a price point that permits you to build yourbusiness, and who’s going to let you satisfy that need? Aren’t therecompetitors who are going to be in the position to satisfy that need muchbetter than you can?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now was that concept obvious to you from the start? McMurtry: Oh yes, absolutely. One of the reasons that I’ve always liked the venturebusiness, the startup venture business, is it’s really not complicated financiallyat all. And it’s much more commonsensical. What are we trying to do? And does anybody care? And does somebody care enough that they might paymoney for it?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] That’s what it all boils down to? McMurtry: And one thing leads to another. The amount of financial analysis, detailedfinancial analysis I ever was required to do about any startup venture we did,could be done on the back of an envelope! I mean this is not verysophisticated stuff.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But does that still hold today? McMurtry: I think to first order it holds, in the centrality of customer demand. But thescale is very different. One of the many changes in the venture business and inthe electronics industry broadly defined, in the years that I’ve been in it, is itused to be a funny little business and you could build little businesses. If yougot a business that got to $50 million in revenue, that was a very successfulelectronics company! And if you got to $100 million, that was really strange,and if you got to a billion, that was weird! That was just— You weresomething else. Things have changed dramatically. Now there’s much more money in theventure business, and the business opportunities— The way the electronicsand the way the chip revolution has occurred, the revolution in chips andmemory storage and all this—you’ve got businesses now that are huge! And itgets more complicated, for sure, compared to our funny little venture days.It’s less likely that a single entrepreneur is going to walk in your door and say,“I’m going to go attack the PC industry. You know, it’s not going to happen. You have to adjust to the times that you’re in, and certainly the fact that theventure business has become large is not so much because everybody thoughtventures should be bigger. But business opportunities have become very large,and the returns to investors from some of these very big opportunities havebecome such that the capital follows in. A point that I would make strongly is that as much as I value venture capital[and] venture capitalists, and I’m proud of my role as a venture capitalist, Iwould argue that almost always, the press and a lot of venture capitalistsoverrate the role of the venture capitalist very dramatically and underrate therole of the entrepreneur. It’s as if venture guys invent companies and ideas. Ithappens occasionally, but for every ten times you hear about it happening, it’sa bit of a reinvention if not a major reinvention. Now there are some people inthe venture business, a number of people in the venture business, who Ipractically revere because their ability to size up interesting opportunities that are not at all obvious and then pursue them aggressively and then help turnthose companies into major enterprises—that’s a huge, that’s a great talent.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And you don’t think you’ve done that? McMurtry: I don’t have the talent at that level. I have had the privilege of being alongwith some very effective entrepreneurs, so that I’ve certainly had the personalsatisfaction and the financial rewards of having been very successful. But Ihave to say, without any fabrication, that when I’ve been involved with verysuccessful ventures, I wonder if it wouldn’t have done just as well if I hadn’tbeen there. Whereas when you’re involved with one that doesn’t work, youcan see your fingerprints all over it, all over it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What I get loud and strong from talking to your generation is that venturecapital—and please correct me—is not just a matter of investing money andhoping for good returns. It’s very closely tied with building a company. McMurtry: Absolutely.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So how can you say you don’t have a part in it? McMurtry: Oh no, I do. I do. I just don’t put myself in the category of some people in thebusiness who I think have just been unusually and are unusually capable ofidentifying opportunities and taking advantage of them.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is that some very astute ability to assess the potential of the technology? McMurtry: I think it’s a weird set of talents having to do with being able to focus onmoving targets—understanding what the market opportunity might be,understanding what technologies might be brought to bear to influence it, andwhat competitive environment might you be in, understanding who are thepeople who actually might pull this kind of thing off—it’s amazing. My partner in TVI, Dave [David F.] Marquardt, who’s currently a partner ofAugust Capital, one of the partnerships that came out of TVI [TechnologyVenture Investors], I think is one of a number of people who have this unusualability to size things up. He got us involved in 1980 with Microsoft, whenMicrosoft was a profitable company. They were five years old and they were aBASIC-language company, but they were profitable and growing but wantedsome external help. They didn’t need to be told how to run the business butthey wanted some external help. Dave spent a lot of time with them, and we were ultimately permitted to invest in the company and became the onlyoutside investors in Microsoft in 1981.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That was all right, wasn’t it! McMurtry: That’s right. But you know, Dave, in meeting then with Bill Gates and Paul[G.] Allen who was his partner then, and Steve Ballmer—just concluded theseguys really had an unusual opportunity. Now did they know that it couldbecome what it became? No, heavens no! But he knew that the ideas wereimportant, the market opportunity was good, and these were people we reallywanted to back. A year later he got us involved with Sun Microsystems whenSun was only six months old. And as a measure of how the world changes, forthe first, I think, eight or nine years Dave was on the Sun board and theMicrosoft board, and they were in totally different universes. Only later didthat converge.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, let’s talk about you. I think I can see some tie-ins with your pastexperience—the oil field work maybe is teaching you about what goes on inthe real world and maybe how you deal with people and all that. McMurtry: Right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And then, of course, your engineering, not only education but yourexperience, is giving you a vocabulary and a technical basis to which you canapply various things. Where do your strengths lie? Do you lean one way or theother in these two realms when you’re looking at a new possibility? McMurtry: I am pretty clearly more influenced by the entrepreneurs themselves, and getmore satisfaction from interaction with the entrepreneurs than from anythingelse. As I look back on my career, it is pretty clear that as interesting as someof the technology was, I was always more interested in the people than in themarket, and more interested in the market than in the technology.Part of it is your education sort of takes charge of itself after a while. If youstart down a particular path and stay with it, and that sort of happened to meand I had a great time. But it was also very clear I wanted to be doingsomething different. I didn’t want to be an individual contributor engineer orresearcher long term. Gavitating toward the venture business, particularly,turned out to be really rewarding to me personally because I’ve always likedstarting things. I don’t like running things when they’re running well. I foundthat out later. And in ventures almost nothing’s running well. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because running things is boring? McMurtry: Yes. I get bored but it’s not boring! In fact, you want people running everybusiness, any business that’s trying to grow, you want people running thebusiness who consider it not the least bit boring, but who consider thatincremental improvement in absolutely every aspect of what they’re doing ishugely satisfying and hugely challenging, and that’s what they want to beworking on.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But not for you. McMurtry: But not for me, because I’m just more interested in where else can I go get introuble! [<|endoftext|>
Interviewer laughs] And the venture business provided me with ampleopportunities. I go back to say I was more influenced by the people than bythe market opportunity. In comparing myself to other people who have beenvery, very good at the venture business—some of them are very clearly morefocused on the business opportunity itself, the market opportunity, than on thepeople. They avoid some mistakes that I made in the past and would makeagain probably were I to become enamored of the people and unwilling to beas realistic as I need to be about what the market opportunity is.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Some of the advice that you and Jack Melchor received, according again toJohn Wilson, was that it would be wise to invest at the mezzanine level, andyou said no way. McMurtry: Right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you want to talk about that? McMurtry: We felt that the rewards were going to be a lot better investing in raw startups.It turns out that’s not always true, and we had the benefit in the early days ofInstitutional Venture Associates of being able to make some—they weren’tmezzanine but they were not startup investments—that were very, verysuccessful because the whole climate was one in which venture investing wasnot highly valued. There was not much capital available, and therefore, theownership position that we were able to get in a fair market transaction led tosome very substantial gains, but that’s another tangent.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Investing at the mezzanine level means dealing with a company that has somehistory. 40 McMurtry: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And that wasn’t as exciting as starting at the very earliest stage? McMurtry: That’s true, although if you look at some of the better successes we had—oneof them was Microsoft, which was a five-year old profitable company, sixyear old, when we actually made the investment. And if you look at ROLM—ROLM when IVA invested was a six-year-old profitable company. Otherinvestments—Triad Systems, which Jack and I did, was also profitable whenIVA invested in it. KLA Tencor was also not profitable, but they were not astartup. So we had a bunch that were not startups.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. So it’s not a hard and fast rule. McMurtry: It’s not a hard and fast rule.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is the bottom line are you going to make money in this deal? McMurtry: Yes. You have to be focused on not just making money but potentially makinga lot of money if the thing really works, because you can’t afford to risk yourpartners’ money and your own money. You would never say, “Well, I’mgoing to learn something about this business and its industry, so I’ll make alittle investment there.” You would never do that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What about when it’s your own money? McMurtry: Oh then you can do dumber things. [<|endoftext|>
Interviewer chuckles] You really have muchmore flexibility with your own money.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I would think so. McMurtry: And I’ve done some investments over the years, since I’ve been out of ventureinvesting for other people. I’ve made some seed investments that I wouldnever have made with anyone else’s money.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So that responsibility for managing other people’s money is a big deal?  McMurtry: It’s a very big deal.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do we need to stop? McMurtry: In fact, I need to break because I’m running into some time pressure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, it’s June 30, 2009, and this is the second interview with Dr. McMurtry.And as I said off-tape, I think we’re up to Institutional Venture Associates,which was founded in 1973. One of the many things you said last time wasthat was not an optimal period for venture capital. [laughter] So what wereyou thinking when you started off on this new partnership? McMurtry: What I was thinking was that I really wanted to remain in the venture capitalbusiness, and it was time to refinance and to restaff Palo Alto InvestmentCompany because Jack Melchor, who had been the founder of it and hadgotten me involved, had decided he wanted to be less involved in the day-today operations of the enterprise. So I was looking around to try to figure outhow to get additional financing, which was very difficult, and to addadditional people to it. At that time, Reid Dennis was planning, just in the early stages of planning toleave American Express where he had been for some time, and there was ayoung man named Jim Norris who worked with him there who I knew quitewell. And the three of us got together and then were joined by J. BurgessJamieson to start Institutional Venture Associates in August of 1973. We spent six months full-time trying to raise money for IVA. We had a leadinvestor, in that American Express had said that if we could find $10 millionto match their $5 million that they would put up $5 million for a $15 millionto $20 million fund. And so we set out to see if we could find the incrementalfunding. And that turned out to be very difficult, quite a long story in itself,million from seven institutional partners. We were very, very grateful for theirsupport because most other people we talked to at that time told us that theythought we were basically crazy to think about doing something like that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Meaning because of the economic climate?  McMurtry: The economic conditions, the market conditions, and even if you backed acompany that became successful—although that was unlikely—even if youbacked a successful company and if it went public it would sell in themarketplace at some very modest price, and so the return to the investors wasnot there. Of course our argument was that getting things started in adownturn is the most positive time to do it, provided you believe that it’s adownturn and not a permanent decline! [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: In other words, the only way you can go is up, you hope! McMurtry: That’s right. That’s right. And we were fortunate in being able to find somepeople who were willing to back us.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now were you pulling on some of the connections that you had established? McMurtry: I really had no financial connections with any of the firms that we ended upgetting money from, which were mainly insurance companies and AmericanExpress and the Ford Foundation. It was an unusual mix. But we did get it puttogether, and I continued to work with Jack Melchor on the Palo AltoInvestment Company investments. And so I was sort of doing double dutythere for some period of time.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, well particularly since from what you’ve said, that Jack Melchor waskind of pulling back. McMurtry: Yes, he wanted to be less directly involved, although he was involved onsome of the boards. It all worked out fine. We got the money raised. It wasvery interesting. We raised this money for IVA in April and May of ’74, andthen we began looking for investment opportunities, and it took us fifteenmonths until we found the first opportunity to invest in.In hindsight, fortunately, we did not miss any great deals during that time thatwe were exposed to. But it was clear to us years later that we had been sotraumatized by the process of raising money and had been told by so manypeople that it was a crazy thing to do and that you couldn’t make money inthis business, and that even if you backed a successful company it wouldn’tsell for much in the market. We were traumatized by that. We didn’t know itat the time, but it’s pretty clear that we were influenced by that. We broke thatlogjam in the fall of ’75, and it was interesting, the first investment we madewas in ROLM, and I think I mentioned something about that last time.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, you did.  McMurtry: In which I could do a lot of the work, but I had to withdraw from any decisionby the partnership on whether we would do it. We did do it and that turned outto be a very big success. We also did a company called NBI, which was aword-processing company. The initials NBI stood for Nothing But Initials,which was a clever name. [laughter] And they were in Boulder, Colorado andthey had a slow start but ended up becoming quite a successful company for atime. And then another investment we made, somewhat later, was in Triad SystemsCorporation, which had been started in ’72. In 1979, I think, we made aninvestment in that company, actually a secondary investment, bought stockfrom people who were interested in selling. We also did an investment, not until ’78, although I started working with themin ’75, in a company called KLA which made very sophisticated inspectionsystems for the semiconductor industry. And although we started workingwith them in ’75, I had just committed to several investments and knew that Iwas buried and so referred them to other people who could finance the firstphase, and I wanted to get involved with the next phase. Unfortunately, thenext phase, the people who did the first phase wanted to do it all, and veryfortunately there was a third phase in 1978, which our firm, IVA, waspermitted to do and so we got very involved with KLA.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All of a sudden you’re finding all kinds of investment opportunities. Was theeconomic climate changing and entrepreneurs were coming out of thewoodwork? McMurtry: The economic climate was clearly changing and entrepreneurs were comingout of the woodwork. And people had survived the ’73-’74 downturn. If Irecall correctly, in the fall of 1974 the Dow was at 600 or something like that.So it’s not hard to imagine that people were a bit low at that stage. IVA turned out to be a very successful partnership. We only had one, I think,really big miss in that partnership, and that was we had an opportunity quiteearly to invest in Tandem Computers. And we declined to do that which wasextraordinarily unfortunate because it turned out to be—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, and then Kleiner Perkins turned— McMurtry: And it was the KP guys who gave us the opportunity to do it. They had startedtheir fund in 1972, and so they were around when IVA got started.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Another set of engineers.  McMurtry: Yes, a bunch of engineers. That’s right. But we had a wonderful time in IVAand [with?] the fund that raised $19 million. By the time it was six and sevenyears old, it had distributed to its limited partners cash and liquid securitiesworth over $200 million, which was really quite remarkable and somethingthat I did not realize could happen, because my earliest experience had beenthe Palo Alto Investment Company experience. In that case, as I mentionedlast time, I think, it took six years and two months until we saw the first dollarback from any investment we ever made, and it took nine, almost ten years forthe Palo Alto Investment Company portfolio to become really highly valuable.In the tenth year, the combination of cash and liquid securities valued thatportfolio at about a little over $100 million, and we had begun with a total of$3.3 million. But my goodness, it took forever; it was very, very slow.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You mentioned the Ford Foundation as an original investor. McMurtry: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was it commonplace for nonprofits to make risk investments? McMurtry: No, it was relatively uncommon at the time. Stanford had begun to do it andthe Ford Foundation—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: At your behest? Did you have any connection with getting them involved? McMurtry: With Stanford?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: At Stanford. McMurtry: At Stanford—I’ll come to that in a moment, because they did get involved.The Ford Foundation was unusual in that they had an investment manager forspecial investments at that time who was interested in venture and ended upmaking an investment in IVA. They also made an investment in Mayfield andso on, although they had a lot of transitions in that team over time. But otherinstitutions, universities, and so on, did begin to get involved.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What was happening at the federal level? Tax laws and— McMurtry: Yes, there were some big changes in the late seventies—really two very largechanges. One of them was in 1978 the capital gains tax was reduced from 50 percent down to 28 percent, which was a gigantic move—the SteigerAmendment. It produced quite a change. The next thing that happened was in1979 the Department of Labor modified its requirements for management ofpension funds to permit pension funds to invest in illiquid vehicles likeventure capital—illiquid meaning you put your money in and you can’t call itback out or you can’t sell it very readily. And that made a huge difference tothe amount of money flowing into venture capital, whereas it was quitemodest in the mid-seventies, I think when we raised the $19 million in 1974.I think it was more than a fifth of all the money raised by venture capital inthe U.S. in that year. But by ’78, with the capital gains tax reduction in ’79,the amount of money flowing into venture capital went from roughly $100million a year or less up to $200 million, $400 million, $600 million—it wasclimbing very, very rapidly.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now did Steiger and colleagues—I’m sure there were others involved—seethis as a way of getting the U.S. economy going? And did they look at venturecapital—can you now call it an industry by the late seventies? McMurtry: No, no, no. Venture capital was still a very funny little enterprise. Even peoplein Washington who had learned enough about it to know that there was astimulus effect in creating new enterprises did not believe, most of them didnot believe, that that the stimulus effect would lead to major economicchange. They felt that it was healthy and constructive and stimulatinginnovation, but not necessarily that there would be a gigantic boom that wouldcome out of it, as in fact happened.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do I gather from this, then, that things like the reduction in the capital gainstax were not particularly aimed at helping venture capital? McMurtry: They were not particularly aimed at helping venture capital. The capital gainstax reduction goes back a long way. But one person, a guy named Bill[William F.] Ballhaus, Sr., who was at Beckman Instruments, did a personalcrusade to try to convince Congress that if you want to stimulate investmentand create growth, you’ve got to remove some of the impediments, some ofthe taxes on capital, and you’ve got to make the capital more mobile, andyou’ve got to make it more available. He took that up and others took it up.The National Venture Capital Association, which was started in about ’73—‘73, yes, that’s right—took up that charge and began working on it. ReidDennis, my partner at TVI, along with David Morgenthaler, worked endlesslyto try to get the changes in the tax law, and it actually had some impact onthat. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, Mr. Dennis talked about that in his interview. It was very interesting. McMurtry: It was very, very well done. I told Reid at the time I thought the effort that hewas spending in that arena was a waste of time. [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You ate your words! McMurtry: And I ate my words, and I ate them very, very happily indeed. I was startledand pleased at that result. But let me jump ahead for a moment, if I may, andwe can come back.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Sure. McMurtry: In late ’79, early 1980, I was thinking about what the next phase of my careermight be. I was very happy working with Reid and Burge—Jim Norris hadleft the partnership at that point. But I decided that for the next phase of myventure career, I really wanted to see if I could put together a group withpeople younger than I, smarter than I, and who could set a new tone for whatwe were trying to do. And I would continue to work with Institutional VentureAssociates and continue to wrap up all of the investments that we had madeand continue in making new investments, for that matter. Although by thetime you get to the sixth year of a ten-year fund, you’ve pretty much done allthe new investing, that is investing in new companies, that you’re going to do. So I decided to start something, and we ended up calling it TechnologyVenture Investors. I started planning it in the spring of 1980 and got Jim[James J.] Bochnowski and Dave [David F.] Marquardt to join me.Bochnowski had been running Shugart Associates, a local disk drivecompany, and had previously been in the venture business with the Sprout[Group] fund, which was part of Donaldson, Lufkin, and Jenrette. DaveMarquardt was an engineer from Columbia who had worked locally in thedisk drive industry and then had gone to the Stanford Business School andwas finishing the Stanford Graduate School of Business in 1979. The three ofus got together to start Technology Venture Investors, and all seven of theIVA institutional partners were interested in investing. Then we were contacted by two other people who were very interested inwhat we were up to and who at that stage had become interested in alternativeinvestments and had been tracking who was doing what in that business. Oneof them was at Stanford University—Rod [Rodney H.] Adams, the treasurerof Stanford, who was a pioneer in that field. Rod contacted us, and we wentthrough all the hoops with him of being evaluated and talking with him. But they decided to invest, as well as did the pension and profit-sharing plans ofthe Hewlett-Packard Company. They had decided that they were interested inthis alternative investment arena also, and so they got involved. We ended upwith nine partners in the first TVI fund, which was a $24 million fund, as Irecall. We charged ahead and started making investments in what was thengetting to be a pretty frothy time.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: The early eighties. McMurtry: We invested very rapidly, and in fact raised a second TVI fund in 1982. Weraised one in ’80, one in ’82, and then we raised the third fund in 1984, andthat fund lasted until 1988 when we raised the last TVI fund.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: This was a very different economic time than when you formed the firstpartnership. How much did your reputation—particularly your success rate—play into your ability to get investors? McMurtry: Oh it plays in dramatically. The ultimate success of the Palo Alto InvestmentCompany portfolio and the success of the IVA portfolio gave us theimprimatur of success that we had lacked earlier. Since all of us like to backwinners, we tend to gravitate in that direction. And it leads to a situation inwhich it is easy to get money, as long as you are successful. Your challenge isnot to take so much money that you cannot manage it effectively, and so thatyou can remain successful over time.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And did you consciously stop trying to gather new investments? Realizing at acertain point you had enough and you couldn’t handle much more? McMurtry: No, we were concerned in TVI that we already had raised perhaps too muchmoney and had made too many investments, and in fact to some extent thatbecame true in the ’83 peak. In the downturn after that we had a lot oflosers—actually no more than usual—but they’re always punishing when theyhappen. But we never felt that we should go try to raise as much money as wecould raise, thank God. We focused on how much money could we raise andput to work effectively, given the team that we had and the team that weplanned to have. And that led what we did. All four TVI funds—the totalinvestment we had—was $270 million, which to me is still a very largenumber, but it is a small fund by today’s standards.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So does your restraint not apply today?  McMurtry: The world changed, the world changed. And more opportunities becameavailable to put larger amounts of money at work, more opportunities werethere to build companies that could grow to billion-dollar marketcapitalization. ROLM got there and ultimately KLA got there, but almostnone of the earlier companies could achieve that level because the marketsthey were addressing were typically relatively small. It was only with the realboom of the chip business and the minicomputer and then themicrocomputer—the PC business and disk drives and so on—did markets getbig enough that you could have these very large companies. I do think thatover the years, certain funds have succumbed to the very real pressure to takemore money, please take more money and do it. And it’s caused people tochange their strategy a bit if they find that they’re managing much moremoney than they were used to managing.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How might they change their strategy in that case? McMurtry: People have tended to need to put more money at work in a particularcompany. And that can lead you to over-invest dollars in a company thatperhaps should be kept on a somewhat shorter leash. It tends to also cause youto think about investing in later-stage investments where you can often putmore money to work, and it just tends to take you off focus. We managed tostay pretty much on focus, in spite of, I’m sorry to say, never really gettingbetter at reducing the number of losses we had. It was very frustrating. But asmuch as we were unable to reduce the number of losses that we had, wecontinued to have the good fortune of finding very successful companies toback. And we got other people involved. Bob Kagle joined us in 1984 at TVI,having been at Boston Consulting Group. Then Jim Bochnowski left the firmin 1988 because he’d been doing some biotech investing. We were doingbiotech and information technology within TVI when we decided they wereso different that they should be separate. So we spun off the biotech investingas a separate fund called Delphi Ventures, which is still doing very well, andkept TVI focused on information technology. That was Dave Marquardt and Iand Bob Kagle, and then John Johnston joined us 1988, and that hascontinued. We got TVI pretty well wrapped up, fortunately. In 1994 when I was deciding what I wanted to do next, I decided I wanted tocontinue to work out all the TVI investments but I did not want to be a generalpartner of a new fund going forward. My partners decided at that time thatalthough they could continue together and do another TVI thing, they decidedto do two new funds. Dave and John decided to do August Capital, and BobKagle got together with Bruce [W.] Dunlevie and three other guys to startBenchmark Capital. They did those in ’95, and I invested in both of those buthad no management responsibility for them, which was delightful. Then I continued to work on TVI companies. It took another eight years until I wasoff the last board from a TVI company, but we had a wonderful time in TVI.Dave Marquardt got us involved as the only outside investors in Microsoft in1981, and he started working on that in 1980.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: When you say outside, what do you mean? McMurtry: Meaning that it’s the only money other than family and friends that came intoit. Microsoft was not a startup; they started in 1975. They were profitablewhen we invested in 1981, but they permitted us to invest because they wereinterested in getting some help, and they felt that Dave and our firm could beuseful to them, and we were very privileged to be able to get involved. Wehad no idea how successful it could be, we just had no idea how successfulthey might be.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, and you cited Microsoft and ROLM as well in the first interview asbeing exceptions to your rule that seed capital, startup funds, are what youprefer to do. McMurtry: That’s right. That’s right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But these firms were just too good? McMurtry: These were so good, these were so good. Another example of that was donelate in 1990. Intuit, the company that makes the Quicken financial packageand now Turbotax, and so on—Quickbooks—had never raised any significantoutside capital. They were started in 1984, but in 1990 they were alreadyprofitable and growing like Microsoft had been. They were interested ingetting some help, and they ran what in the venture business we call a charmcontest, in which they talked to a lot of different investment bankers andventure capitalists to see with whom they would like to work and permit toinvest in their company, We were given the opportunity, along with KleinerPerkins and Sierra Ventures, to invest in Intuit. I went on the board in 1990,and John Doerr, a friend from Kleiner Perkins, went on the board, and weserved on the board together. Actually, I left the board in 2001, which is aboutas long as I’ve been on any board. But I had a wonderful time, and they werea terrific group of people going through a lot of transitions. Other things that we did in TVI, where Dave also got us involved with SunMicrosystems when Sun was six months old, in August of ’82. As a measureof how the world changes, for the first seven years he was a director of Sunand a director of Microsoft when they were in different universes at that time.But he got off the Sun board later and stayed on the Microsoft board. 50<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And nobody looked askance? McMurtry: No, no. In fact, Sun was a UNIX-based engineering workstation company andMicrosoft was a DOS-based PC company. Their potential customers didn’treally overlap at all until later. We had a lot of other fun companies in TVI.We got involved with Linear Technology, a very good chip company, withAltera [Corporation], with Cirrus Logic, with Sierra Semiconductor. We also got involved with a company called VeriFone, which made all thetransaction automation systems that you see at retail counters—you run yourcard through and all that. VeriFone pioneered that area. It was an unusualcompany started in Hawaii and then moved to San Mateo. We backed it andparticipated in bringing in a new CEO with the support and encouragement ofthe existing CEO. Hatim Tyabji, who ran the company, did a fantastic job. Iwas on that board for a long time. We also did things like Synopsys, whichwas a design automation company, and did some disk drive companies, andI’d have to look at a list to see some of the others.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You’re talking about successes. How about bringing up one failure, and why? McMurtry: Oh we had many failures; we had many failures. And one of the failures that Ithink I feel the most—you feel bad about them all. But one I feel really badabout is one I spent about ten years working with and we still lost it. And wehad in the company some people who were exceptionally able and who laterwent on to do marvelous things, in particular in connection with Cisco[Systems]. The company was called DAVID Systems, which was acombination of voice and data communications over telephone lines, and itwas started in 1984, I believe, or maybe a little earlier. I went on the boardin ’84, and then we kept trying to figure out the path. It was going to betelephone communications, but with data available through it. Thetechnologists in the company had developed some very, very effectivetechniques for being able to do reasonably high-speed data transmission overtelephone wires. And yet we never found any kind of a sweet spot in themarket for that, in spite of raising a lot of money and working very, very hardon it, and working with some good management to try to make it happen.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer Why? McMurtry: None of us were smart enough to pay enough attention to the marketplace thatwas telling us that what we were trying to do did not make a lot of sense, atleast was not going to be big. And we didn’t pay enough attention to thetechnologists in the company to see the quality of what they were doing and ask ourselves, “Where might that find some significant application?” In otherwords, do a little marketing.Don’t take a product and say we’re going to shoveit into a market and invent a market. But rather, there’s some very clevertechnology here that they can do that other people can’t do very well, if at all.Where might that have application? And we were just, frankly, I the most,never smart enough to figure that out.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] Well, I don’t know about that. McMurtry: And we ended up literally losing the company after gigantic amounts ofinvestment and enormous effort on the part of a lot of people.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: There was a market somewhere, you just hadn’t found it? McMurtry: Yes, and then the market certainly evolved. But we just missed that onecompletely. But there were lots of others.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I want to hear about the personal dynamics in these partnerships. Would it befruitful to compare the two partnerships and how the partners in each workedtogether? I know it’s not a controlled study, because of course the economy isvery different in those two cases. Nonetheless, how do personality andpersonal relations amongst the partners fit into all this? McMurtry: That is, of course, a very complicated subject, but let me take a crack at it.There are certainly some similarities in the way the partnerships worked.Going back to Jack Melchor and our work together: even though Jack wasclearly a mentor and much more experienced than I, both as an entrepreneurand as an investor, he treated me on pretty much an equal basis. This is, whatwe were trying to do was each use our abilities to their maximum, to try tobenefit each other and the business that we were leading. And the same thinghappened in IVA. Jim Norris and Burge Jamieson and Reid Dennis and Iformed a very tight partnership, and we had rather dramatic personalitydifferences within that firm, as anyone would tell you.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, say a little bit about that. McMurtry: Reid is very outgoing. One of the most optimistic people you’ll ever meet andhas almost never seen a deal he didn’t like. [laughter] Now that is not to sayhe will do every deal that comes up. It’s just by nature he’s very, verypositive. Burge Jamieson, on the other hand, by nature is very reticent. In fact,in the IVA days, it could pretty much be said that it wasn’t clear that there wasa deal that Burge would like. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] So you’ve got two people poles apart! McMurtry: That’s right. But as someone who thought of himself as reasonably balanced,when in fact I know I’m a raging optimist, it was helpful to me in many ways,because I knew where Reid was coming from, I knew where Burge wascoming from. Very often, Reid would have some insights as to why the peoplewere interesting, and Burge would have some very good insights about whywe didn’t really understand this very well or why there might be some hazardsthere that we should pursue. So it was quite a helpful balance.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, and then you did pursue? McMurtry: After we broke the logjam of our terror, [laughter] the first fifteen months, wemade a number of investments that, as I said, became very successful. In the TVI partnership, there was much less variation. Jim Bochnowski andDave Marquardt and I were, I would say, by nature more similar than not, inthat no one in that group was either forward-biased to an extreme or reticent toan extreme. And so that, in a way, made a bunch of the conversations moreinteresting because you didn’t find yourself having to pull someone backwhile you’re dragging someone else ahead. But it also meant that, as in anypersonal interactions, diversity is often a benefit even though it’s a hugeannoyance. [<|endoftext|>
Interviewer chuckles] What we found after TVI was a couple of years old and we’d made someinvestments, we decided that we were not raging optimists but we wereobviously willing—we’d seen some mistakes already, as usual—and wedecided that we were perhaps not being as critical as we needed to be. And sowe set up a rule within the firm, and that was, if we get to the point of makingan investment decision, then if the three of us are really enthusiastic aboutmaking the investment, it was the job of one of us, not the same one all thetime, it was the job of one of us to say, “Wait a minute. We obviously don’tunderstand this deal well enough. We’ve got to do some more work on thisbefore we make a decision, because I think we’re being naïve and being sweptup in the enthusiasm.” And that turned out to be a very constructive thing todo in that it either caused us not to do deals or it caused us to do deals wherewe were much better informed than we would have been, and much lesssubject to surprise than we would have been if we had not done that particularwork.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. And was this due diligence, if you want to call it that, mainly consistingof picking up the telephone and getting others’ opinions? How did youinvestigate further?  McMurtry: The due diligence was done in several pieces. You generally tried tounderstand what the market opportunity was, and you used all the tools thatwere available to you. Generally if you found an investment in a market, andyou were the responsible person to pursue it, you knew something about thatmarket already, and you learned more as time went on. And you had contacts,people who were in businesses in that field, people who were consulting inthat field, and you’d done a fair amount of reading in it, so you could makesome guesstimates about what might go on there. You also looked in detail at the product plans and tried to figure out, really,just how different and interesting is this product? What kind of advantagesmight it have, how could and should it be priced in the marketplace, what kindof pricing flexibility is there, and what kind of growth potential is there? Andthen you’d spend a lot of time with the people. We’d spend a lot of timegetting personal references and then going back and talking to those personalreferences and trying to also talk, not just to the references that were given tous, but references that we were able to glean from talking to the references wetalked to. Because we would often say, “Well, who else might really knowthis person well and have a significant opinion?” And we generally, at least Ideveloped a system in which unless I had gotten at least one negativereference on somebody, I figured I hadn’t dug deep enough. Almost anybodywho’s been around at all or has tried to do something unusual has bentsomebody out of shape at one time or another or has been on the wrong sideof an argument. I generally learn much more from that than I learn from thebenefits I hear about.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I imagine too that the negativities didn’t necessarily discourage you. McMurtry: That’s right. No, you just need to understand that everyone’s complex andwhat is this person like? One thing that helped us a lot was we were, in thattime, unusually open with our entrepreneurs, in that when we were gettingclose to making an investment decision, we would tell them—look, here’s alist of references that you can call and then also talk to anybody else in theworld about us, because you need to understand who we are and how webehave, in particular how we behave when things are tough. So talk to thesepeople. I would always include on the list at least one name of someone whohad formerly run a company that we were invested in, and who we were partof removing that person from the enterprise, because that’s an important kindof person to talk to. If these people decide they don’t like you, how do theydeal with you? And how does all that happen?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What you’re talking about, it seems to me, is the fit between the venturecapitalists and the entrepreneurs. Is that widely understood?  McMurtry: I think nowadays it’s pretty widely understood.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did the former idea tend to be, we need to go out and find the money and whothe people are is not quite so important? McMurtry: Well, I think the earlier people in the venture business who did it wellunderstood it quite well, and developed those relationships. I certainlyunderstood it from early on. I think you can state it simply, and that is, ifyou’re going to be in business with someone, you really want them tounderstand as much about you, not from you, but from other people, as theypossibly can, because in that circumstance you are much less likely to surprisethem negatively in some way. And similarly, if I’m going to back anentrepreneur, I want to understand where that entrepreneur is coming fromand how does he or she behave in different circumstances, because again, Idon’t want to be surprised. I want to have a better frame of reference indealing with them. Frankly, a lot of very successful entrepreneurs are far from being super cockyand arrogant but are in fact reasonably insecure, lack confidence about theirability to really pull this thing off. And very often, at a time when things arerocky and someone dropping out of space might look at it and say, “Well, youneed to be really critical of that person because this thing isn’t working yet,” itmay be exactly the time you need to be highly supportive of that person andhighly encouraging that person to figure out how to focus on those few thingsthat are required to make this successful. There are, of course, other timeswhen you need to be very strongly critical.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, well, you had said in the first session that people were primary, not thatthat excludes other things as well. It’s interesting to hear you talk about morethan just sizing up the entrepreneur. The relationship is really more than abusiness relationship, isn’t it? McMurtry: Yes, oh yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You’re supporting the entrepreneur with far more than money. McMurtry: Oh much more so. And the great satisfaction for me in the venture businesswas observing and participating with the entrepreneurs, and watching themsucceed and watching them build teams, and having a role in that. That wasvery satisfying, although, as I think I mentioned in the first session, it wasvery satisfying but it was never convincing that you were really required.[laughter] But perhaps that’s true of a lot of important situations. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I was read the talk that you gave to the Houston Philosophical Society. Andyou made some disparaging remarks about the importance of the venturecapitalists in all this. McMurtry: [chuckling] I think I could comment on that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Here’s one quote, “Entrepreneurs drive the process, we,” meaning the venturecapitalists, “would be nowhere without them.” That is probably an extremestatement. [chuckling] McMurtry: No. Entrepreneurs do drive the process; venture guys would be no placewithout them. That’s for sure. Venture people can have a meaningful role andcan be very helpful to an enterprise. One thing that has happened as theventure business became a real business as opposed to a sort of a trade—anumber of people in the venture business, in building their franchises and inbuilding their images, have created a pretty big mystique about the ability ofventure capitalists to create industries and to create this and that. Frankly, there are a few people in the venture business who I think have comepretty close to demonstrating that, but when I say pretty close, I mean theywould never have been remotely close were it not for the entrepreneurs. Theycould identify entrepreneurs who perhaps shared a vision or accepted a visionthat led to great success. But a lot of what you hear about the way venturecapitalists started this company or started that company and created this ishugely revisionist history. But we’re all capable of that and it happenseverywhere.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Give me an example of somebody or somebodies, if you like, who you thinkhave had a larger-than-life role in starting a new industry or a new technology. McMurtry: I think Marquardt had some terrific vision in getting us involved withMicrosoft and with Sun and with other related companies that he has done. Ithink John Doerr at Kleiner Perkins has remarkable insights and has reallyhelped create some gigantic enterprises. I think Mike Moritz at Sequoia hasdone the same thing. I think Don Valentine and the rest of his team in theearly days of Sequoia and even the later days of Sequoia did some wonderfulthings. In fact, all of the pioneering VCs—Pitch, and Reid, and everybodyelse, have played that kind of a role at times. But I would continue to say thatthe clamor that you hear about venture capital nowadays places too muchemphasis on the venture capitalist and too little emphasis on the entrepreneurs.The venture capital firms who get that right are going to be the most attractive ones for the entrepreneurs; they’re going to get the better deals, and historywill sort of take care of itself.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I was reading Venture Capital at the Crossroads, which you probably knowbecause you’re part of it. McMurtry: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It mentions you and NBI as an example of what I guess I would justsummarize as this personal touch. The authors talked to people at NBI aboutwhat you brought to the firm, which was a lot of dedication and time, for one,and a lot of confidence that they were going to make it. Was that any sort ofexceptional dedication to that particular firm on your part? McMurtry: It was not exceptional dedication but it was an exceptionally positive result.The entrepreneurs who were there were more able to evolve and takeadvantage of opportunities and take useful advice and discard bad advice.Looking back on the period from ’75 when we invested, until I’ve forgottenexactly when I got off that board, but it was well after it was public in 1979,so probably ’80-’81. But it was a tremendously satisfying experience becausethe company had a couple of near-death experiences, and we had some majorrecruiting requirements that required unusual diligence. I had a lot ofinteraction with potential customers and just really knew the people in thecompany very, very well indeed. That is a case where I certainly didn’t createit, but the constructive role that a venture capitalist can play, with somededication is, for me, probably best exemplified in that firm, although therewere a number of others where I felt very good about what I was able toachieve. Companies that come to mind there are Nellcor and VeriFone andIntuit—really fun things to do.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: If this is the way you go about your investing, namely to spend whatever timeit seems to require, that in itself is going to be a limitation, isn’t it? McMurtry: It’s a definite limitation. We felt that—and most of our firms—if you could beon between six and eight boards at any one time, assuming that you’re onboards where you’re really actively involved, which is the only kind of thingwe did—that would continue to be a pretty tight constraint. I remember whenI was on eight boards at one time—you’ll always have at least one company insignificant trouble, and really just physically trying to manage your time sothat you have your brain in place to be able to deal with what’s going on at aparticular company for this period of time and then shift to that one, to thatone—it’s really strenuous. I’ve always been amazed at people who can be on twenty, twenty-five boards. But if you do it that way, you do a very differentmodel basically. But the model that I liked was one with intense involvement, and that isindeed very limiting in your time, which is the way we ended up withestimating how much money we could invest—how many partners are there,how many investments are we likely to make over a given period of time,what do we think is the average investment—not initial, but total at maturitythat we might make in that. Therefore, that adds up to a certain number, and ifyou’ve got four partners, it doesn’t add up to $300 million; it’s a lot less thanthat.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Enough time, maybe, to broach a question related to the article you gave me I wonder how you feelthat it fits or doesn’t fit with venture capital. Are there any territorialboundaries? Either mythical or aggressively protected? McMurtry: Oh, I think there are a lot of mythical boundaries, but my view is that angelinvesting is critical and highly desirable. A lot of angel investing in the pasthas been not particularly helpful investing, in the sense that the people doing itare doing it with a little bit of their money and a little tiny bit of their time andsort of spreading the bread on the water and yet aren’t that deeply involvedwith the enterprise. But that’s fine, because these entrepreneurs need access tocapital, and I am for anything that provides entrepreneurs with access tocapital. If angel investors waste some money because they invest in stuff thatshouldn’t be done, I think that’s net constructive because the entrepreneurs arelearning a great deal from that process.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And maybe also the venture capitalists don’t make that mistake if thecompany’s gone? [chuckling] McMurtry: Absolutely, absolutely, absolutely. A lot of venture capitalists have gotten sobig that they find it very, very hard to do anything like seed investing.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right, because it would just require so many different companies. McMurtry: So many companies and such relatively small amounts of money. So I thinkangel investors are very, very helpful. Unfortunately, they tend to flow withthe cycles. It would be nice if angel investing flowed against the cycle of Brent Bowers, “In Pitching to Angel Investors, Preparation Tops Zeal,” New York Times, June 11, 2009. venture, because that would smooth the access of funding for entrepreneurs.But in fact the angel investing flows very much with that cycle, so whenventure is booming, angels are booming, and when venture is tight, angels gounderground. I used to do some angel investing after TVI, but I pretty muchstopped doing it after a while because after the 2001 dotcom bubble burst andwe were in the doldrums, it was very hard to get paid for doing seed investing.A venture firm would decide to invest at the first round but they’d want toinvest at the same price or lower that had been invested earlier. That made,essentially, no sense for the seed investor.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It seems to me you very much like to have your hand on the gears, so tospeak, I mean to be deeply involved in advising a company. So it was okayjust to put your money in? McMurtry: It was all right to do that, because I had confidence in the other people thatwere doing it, and I deliberately decided not to go on any boards and not toget that personally committed because I was focused on other things. [technical interruption to change tape][End Audio File 3] Norton: This is tape number four, we’re still on June 30, and you two can continuetalking about angel investing and anything else.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: My very limited understanding of angel investing is that it is far more shortterm and less involved than what the typical venture capitalist would do. Itgets things started but without the idea of building the company over anumber of years. McMurtry: Yes, that tends to be the case. There are some exceptions to that. Some areangel investors who have maybe retired and enjoy doing [investments], andreally want to do it on their own and don’t want to be part of a venture fund,and have the resources to be able to commit. But by and large, angel investingis about seed-stage investing in companies where you put the money in andsort of check in now and then but really don’t expect to have any meaningfulrole. Occasionally with a group of angel investors, one of the angels mightdecide to agree to go on the board of directors of the company. That’s notuncommon but it’s not a requirement either. Angel investing typically is notintended to build the company in the way you described, in that they’re therefor the angel round and they don’t expect to be there for the third, fourthround of investing in the company. They hope that they will, essentially, seedsomething that can become so successful and be such an efficient user ofcapital that their early investment will ultimately be worth something and willnot be diluted out by all the additional capital that flowed in. There havecertainly been some marvelous examples of that, and it’s a very healthyphenomenon. It turns out there’s a man who I’ve lost track of—he was at the University ofNew Hampshire for a long time—who has tracked seed investing since beforeventure capital was being tracked very effectively and has been able to showthe role of seed investing in the American economy, which has been quitesignificant. And I’m blanking on the name, but the people at the NationalVenture Capital Association or people at the [Ewing Marion] KauffmanFoundation for Entrepreneurship would be able to get you information aboutwho has done some academic research on seed investing, because it’s veryimportant.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, that article in a very monetary way certainly verifies that. I was reallysurprised to read that seed investment is far more substantial than venturecapital investment. 60 McMurtry: Yes, yes. It really is and has been that way for quite some time. Well, anexample of that, as I mentioned in the first tape: when the GTE division that Iwas in was being sold, and I was thinking, in ’63, about starting a companyand needed some capital, I went to Houston and talked with Newton Rayzorwho was the Rice trustee I’d gotten to know quite well. He agreed in aconversation that they would provide financing, yet his name would nevershow up as a venture capitalist at all.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. Well, going back to the talk that you gave to the Houston PhilosophicalSociety, another thing you said, and I quote Dr. McMurtry, “Attitudes,” andyou were meaning to venture capital, “have changed since the bubble burstand that’s a good thing.” But you didn’t go on to explain why it was a goodthing. So would you do that? McMurtry: I can explain that, sure. Leading up to the dotcom—or part of the dotcombubble that occurred between ’95 and 2001, an enormous number ofcompanies was started and lots of money flowed into them. It was quite easyto raise money, and the Internet was just evolving and everything could bedone with the Internet. And so, people raised gigantic amounts of money andoften, because the markets were hot, could take the companies public in arelatively short period of time, even with modest, if any, results. And so some very bad attitudes developed, and that is, all of us should go startcompanies, and we should put some money into them, and then take thempublic as quickly as we can, and then try to cash out because money can bemade very, very quickly. And it was, in fact, about making money quickly. Itwas not about building a company; it was making money quickly. And ifmaking money quickly is relatively easy—which it was in that time frame—there’s a powerful incentive to try to make money quickly. People tend to pileinto that and do it until it crashes of its own weight, which is indeed whathappened. What I said in 2005, that the attitudes changed after the dotcom bubble, Imeant that the idea that let’s just start something to make money in a shortperiod of time, like a couple of years, went away completely. It just wentaway completely. Wanting to do it didn’t go away, but the prospect for beingable to do it went away. Therefore attitudes had to change, because if it’s nolonger possible, as much as I might like to do it, I’m not going to go there.And so, if I’m going to start something, I’d better be in it to try to build abusiness. And because the markets post-the bubble were not very good, I can’texpect to sell this to anybody any time soon; I’m going to have to stay with itfor quite some period of time. And so I’m back into the company-buildingmode and counting on the fact that if I build value, then it will ultimately—notnecessarily today [in the current recession]—but it will ultimately berecognized, and I will ultimately be rewarded for it. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, from talking to your generation of venture capitalists, that seems to be apervasive concept. McMurtry: It is.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, there are several things going on here, as I se it. You said last time that,in the end, you’re in this business to make money. That it’s your responsibilityto make money because you have investors. But at the same time, it’s veryclear to me that almost of equal importance is building the company. And sothis bubble and what it did to people’s attitudes, was that an aberration? McMurtry: Absolutely. But we create aberrations and we create bubbles. Human naturecreates bubbles and human nature creates deep valleys of the kind that wewere in in ’73 and ’74, when it was clear one would be crazy to do venturecapital or one would be crazy to start a company. The attitudes come and go,and I think we’re in a more healthy situation now than we’ve been for sometime.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But the way I’ve taken it from what you’ve said is that it wasn’t that venturecapitalists just resolved to be more—I don’t know if ethical is the word—butthey were forced into it by market conditions. McMurtry: Yes, yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So I’m wondering—and this is a segue into your association with the twoventure capital associations: the National Venture Capital Association[NVCA] and the Western Association of Venture Capitalists [WAVC]. Dothose organizations make any effort to educate the young blood presumablycoming into venture capital that it’s just not a matter of making money, it’s amatter of also building companies, and that’s your responsibility as well. McMurtry: That used to be strictly a self-selection process. But some work did begin latein my venture career, some work began that had been begun by someone elsethat was joined into by the National Venture Capital Association, in whichthere were actually programs put together in the summer, I think, withexperienced venture capitalists, to train younger venture capitalists or peoplewho were interested in the venture capital business. The KauffmanFoundation has done some things with internships as well, that have beenvery— I’m not current on these but I would look up all of that. As often happens when a small guild—which is what venture capital was—becomes a trade, becomes a business, then the educational discipline doesevolve, and that has evolved. I’m not current with what’s there, but there aresome very useful things. And not the least being some very useful classes inbusiness schools now, about entrepreneurship and about venturing. Duringmost of my venture career, up through the mid-nineties when I was superactive in new funds, business schools had anecdotal-type classes that werevery popular and taught well. In fact, Pitch Johnson taught a class at Stanfordfor many years. It was very highly received but was viewed by the academicsas anecdotal: this is not a business discipline; this is a series of anecdotes. Itwas very interesting that it took until about a decade ago for the StanfordGraduate School of Business to embrace entrepreneurship as an academicdiscipline. And they’re doing some very, very good work in that area.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I sat in on a course on entrepreneurship, taught by Mario [M.] Rosati, at Haas. McMurtry: Oh yes!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: He did, I thought, a wonderful job. Venture capital was definitely part of it,and definitely building companies was part of his message.During those years of the bubble, people must have flocked into venturecapital with very little background whatsoever. McMurtry: Oh they did, oh they did. If you look at the amount of money that was raisedin venture capital up to and through the bubble—gigantic amounts of moneywere raised, multiple new funds were started, and a lot of those willeventually go away. They don’t go away quickly, unfortunately, because youget the funding, you draw down the funding, and you can be around for areally long time. So there’s this huge wad of money still in the venture cyclethat needs to—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But they’ll be winnowed out. McMurtry: I think it’ll be winnowed out over time, but the time constant is longer thanyou might like to see it. It takes longer.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: The companies are there for a while, aren’t they! [chuckling] McMurtry: They are there for a while. That’s right. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: We could go on forever about venture capital, per se. Do you think we’vegotten the gist? McMurtry: I think so.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I’d like to talk about the larger context. We mentioned Reid Dennis’s work atthe federal level and some of the legislation. What we didn’t mention, is theeffect of Sarbanes-Oxley. Do you have opinions? I’ll bet you do. McMurtry: I have an opinion. I have an opinion which is less informed than it would be ifI were still on public company boards. But I was on public company boards, acouple of them, after Sarbanes-Oxley was passed, and it had some prettyimmediate impacts on those companies. The immediate impact was toincrease, quite dramatically, the amount of money that the company needed tospend in its auditing procedures, and a lot of the paperwork that had to beprovided. On balance, I think Sarbanes-Oxley, by my standards, went way toofar in trying to address some old problems with rules and regulations whichcould be satisfied by spending large amounts of money on consultants andemployees, but which had the impact, if anything, of diffusing responsibilityat the time it needed to be focusing it. It really diffused the responsibility andyet focused the responsibility on the CEO and the chief financial officer, whocan go to prison quite easily for simple mistakes that might be made in theorganization. And if the idea is to make the guy in charge accountable at allcosts and independent of what’s going on—and I think that was partly whatwas in mind of the people who were passing it—then I think it works. It’s sortof too much, I’m afraid, and particularly younger companies where things arein fact simpler, do not need to be complicated by a lot of extra rules andreporting.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And also the expense, I imagine. McMurtry: And the expense is hopeless. So I’m very grateful that I’m not involved as adirector of any public company at this point. It has become highlyburdensome, and I’m afraid unnecessarily so.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Sarbanes-Oxley was in large part a reaction to some of the malfeasance thathad been so obvious—Enron and WorldCom, et cetera. McMurtry: Right. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you feel at the time, and do you feel now, that the government shouldhave taken some sort of action? McMurtry: Oh I think they had to take action. An appropriate question is, how would Irewrite Sarbanes-Oxley to address the problems that they’re trying to address,but also not to unnecessarily burden emerging companies. I don’t know theanswer to that, but my guess is there are some pretty good answers to that. Ihope that people who are involved in these companies and in the industrygroups will be able to do some effective lobbying to get some of the ruleschanged in ways that will be constructive, without diluting the impact of whatis trying to be accomplished.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Are you optimistic that the Obama administration will move things forward? McMurtry: I’m just not well enough informed. The Obama administration and theCongress are obviously, given the downturn we’ve been through and thereaction they’ve had, they’re obviously willing to act. And I support thatstrongly. My concern is that since they are so willing to act by nature, theywill be willing to do a lot more at the federal level than is, in fact,constructive. But you can’t control that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What is there about this region that has become a high-technology center?Does that automatically mean that there’s going to be a venture capital arm inthe region? McMurtry: I think it does mean that there will be a venture capital arm in the region, andthat it follows the entrepreneurs. And so the question you need to ask is, whatinstitutional structures, legal structures, governance, and so on, would berequired in order to stimulate, in order to create a climate that will attractpotential entrepreneurs? And the answer to that from experience that we cansee is tquality universities and a reasonably welcoming business climate.AnnaLee Saxenian, at Berkeley, has written some very interesting booksabout comparative advantage of different [regions]—one that goes back to avery interesting book about comparing Silicon Valley and Route 128 inBoston. [Culture and Competition in Silicon Valley and Route 128.]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh yes, Saxenian’s book. McMurtry: At the time that they were both very strong and before Silicon Valley simplywent way beyond anything that was going on there. I think Berkeley andStanford and others have had a huge impact in attracting the kind of peoplewho will naturally be entrepreneurs; they’re bright and energetic and ambitious and fearless to some extent. And the Boston area did the samething. The biggest concentration in Texas is around the University of Texas atAustin. A lot of it is that these are attractive places to live as well. But I’m notsure what all creates it. One thing I am quite sure about is that where the entrepreneurs are, venturecapitalists will follow. You can plant venture capital all over the place andfind that it’s not going to work. There’s a man, a very interesting man, in SanFrancisco named Phil [Philip] Horsley, with a firm called Horsley Bridge[Partners]. They are a fund of funds; that is, they take money frominstitutional investors and they invest it in venture capital funds. They’ve beendoing that for more than thirty years and doing it very successfully. And theyalso have a fantastic database of the performance of all the funds they’veinvested in in the venture capital industry in general, and they’re just reallyknowledgeable. If you want to talk to people who are firsthand knowledgeableabout the evolution and state of the venture capital industry, Phil Horsley andhis team would be a very good place to start. They’re on Sansome, I think, inSan Francisco. If you have any trouble finding them, let me know.But Horsley Bridge came up because I saw Phil at a meeting a few weeks ago,and people were talking about venture capital and the geography. He pointedout that in the early days of their fund, one of the earlier funds in the eighties,they decided that they really wanted broad geographic diversification andindustry diversification and startups versus later stage investments. Theywanted a broadly diversified portfolio, and so they deliberately went aroundthe country, and they seeded venture capital operations, started venture capitaloperations, or provided money to people who were doing venture capital, inlots and lots of different places all over the United States. And what theyfound, after a substantial period of time, was that they should haveconcentrated all of their funding in Silicon Valley and along parts of the EastCoast, in Boston. What they demonstrated, in a pretty direct way, was at leastduring that time frame, and I would argue for all time frames, you can providethe capital, but you can’t create the entrepreneurs. And yet if the entrepreneursare there, the capital will come. Those of us from Silicon Valley were very grateful that the establishedventure capital funds on the East Coast in Boston and in New York and inChicago did not choose to set up significant offices in Silicon Valley early on.Now they’ve all done it later, but much, much, much later. They gave us—sort of the uneducated local venture guys were given a huge runway to try toget themselves established in a way that would have been harder if there hadbeen a sophisticated presence. People did have a presence but it was typicallya small office, a single-person office. But the main thing was people wouldgenerally fly out from the East Coast to work with the companies in SiliconValley. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is there a style out here? Or maybe something even more substantial than thatthat distinguishes how venture capital operates on the West Coast as opposedto anywhere else? McMurtry: Yes. I’m not sure if this is still true, but in the old days of the business, theEast Coast venture capitalists tended to be more, I would say, aloof withrespect to their companies; they were viewed as investments as opposed to ourview that we were getting into a partnership with an entrepreneur to try tocreate something together. It was a more formal relationship, characteristic ofattitudes in general on the East Coast compared to the West Coast.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I brought up the two venture capital organizations, and there’s really nottime to do them due justice, but you headed both of them at one time oranother. Is their agenda, their purpose also different? McMurtry: Relatively different. The Western Association of Venture Capitalists has beenmuch more focused on building relationships among the venture individuals,particularly in Silicon Valley.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Amongst themselves? Or with entrepreneurs? McMurtry: Amongst themselves more than anything else, and trying to reinforce anetwork of venture capitalists who can call on each other, who will trust eachother, who will share deals and so on. It started out to be really quite a smallclub and a useful thing to get to know other people who were trying to do thiscrazy thing you were trying to do. As it evolved, the Western Association hasbecome more involved with some political issues, with some business practiceissues, with anything that influences—legislation that influences the ability ofentrepreneurs to get access to capital. They’ve been willing to get involved inthat. That came much later. The National Venture Capital Association, from its earliest beginnings in the1970s, early seventies, got focused on what were some of the public policyissues that were important inhibitors to venture capital. One of those turnedout to be high capital gains taxes, another one turned out to be the inability ofpension funds to be able to invest in ventures. So a lot of the initial energy ofthe leadership in the National Venture Capital Association was directedtoward those issues, and they did it very successfully, and they’ve continuedto do that. I was involved with the National Venture Capital Association for many yearsand was president in ’87 and chairman in ’88, or something like that. Theyears before that, I was involved with part of the legislative arm and we would run tours for people from the government, from both branches of thelegislature plus executive branch people—anybody we could get to come toCalifornia. We would have them come and look at companies. We’d see fivecompanies in a day if they had a day. I would arrange with the companies atdifferent stages—tiny and raw startup to a more mature company. I wouldarrange with the entrepreneur— I would tell them a little bit about who theperson was, what they were here for, but mainly they want to know whatyou’re doing, why you’re doing it, and is there anything the government coulddo that might help you out or inhibit you? And it was an eye-openingexperience for these congressmen and senators and executive branch peoplewho came out.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, I bet. McMurtry: It was a very constructive thing to do, and I think the NVCA is probably stilldoing that kind of thing. I distinctly remember a very senior senator who cameout and was intrigued by talking to these crazy people who had startedcompanies. We would finish with a small dinner in Palo Alto with just the fiveentrepreneurs, the head of the NVCA, and the visitor. During one of themeetings, the senator said to the entrepreneur, “Who told you you could dothis?” It was a very legitimate question—who gave you permission to do this?Because the idea that you would just go start a company sounded almostsubversive! Wait a minute! And at first the entrepreneur didn’t understand thequestion and then did get it—you’ve got to get a business license, and you’vegot to get a lawyer, and you’ve got to get— But you just go do it. You just godo it.And one of the most positive features of the USA, and in this area inparticular, has been we have a climate and a rule of law that you can afford todo something like that. If you start it, nobody’s going to steal it from you. Ifyou start it, nobody’s going to extort you. It was absolutely amazing that inmy entire business career I never was exposed to a situation where anyonewas asking for a bribe or a deal on the side. Now, it apparently goes on all thetime in some parts of the country, and I’ve been sheltered not to have to be inthat environment. But what a delightful state it is to be in that [my] situation!Because you’re going to make enough mistakes and errors that you’re goingto lose an enormous amount even when you’re trying your best and evenwhen the laws and so on are helpful to you. The parasitic behavior ofextortion or bribes—that adds a level of ugliness and complexity that prettydramatically increases the chances of failure, I think.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Venture capital is spreading its tentacles out into other parts of the world.That’s a relatively new phenomenon, isn’t it?  McMurtry: It is. It is.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is venture capital going to be different because the context is so different, thelaw is so different, the culture is different? McMurtry: Oh I think both laws and culture play a huge role in the ability to transport anidea like venture capital, and I hope it can be successful in other places. Thereare some examples of that happening in societies that are not particularlyopen, in particular in China, and I think that’s very encouraging.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But you yourself haven’t been involved with overseas ventures? McMurtry: No, I would be terrified of that because of my lack of knowledge of what isreally going on on the ground.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [To Linda Norton] How much more time do we have? McMurtry: We can wrap up anytime.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I wanted to hear a little about extracurricular activities? I know you’ve beenvery active in connection with Stanford, and that you were president of theirboard at one stage. Can you say what you think you might have brought toStanford? McMurtry: Yes. Before I was retired from the venture capital business, I went on theboard of trustees of Rice University in Houston and was on that board for afew years—a number of years. I really found that I was pleased to be therebecause I had a very high opinion of the place and wanted them to continue tosucceed and excel. It was clear that a lot of what I had learned in venturingand in understanding the governance structure for an effective company—a lotof that would carry over into governance of a nonprofit organization like auniversity. And some of the things that were more common in industry at thattime and were less common in universities could be really helpful, such as theideas of the importance of strategic planning, ideas such as explicit evaluationof the performance of the leadership of the organization and feedback withrespect to that, and just a lot of deliberate thoughts about governance andstructure that could be very helpful.  But I particularly enjoyed it because the people involved are highly energetic,very bright, trying to do the right thing, and doing wonderful work for theirstudents and creating good research along the way.I got involved on the Stanford board after I’d been on the Rice board almostten years and found that I could be on both boards without any meaningfulconflict, other than once I was on both boards, I knew that I couldn’tcommunicate anything about one of the universities to the other. Period. Justbecause you have a natural conflict. But anybody who wanted to talk tosomebody at Stanford, I could encourage them to talk to somebody or viceversa. But I found it no conflict at all and found the Stanford board a reallyterrific bunch of people as well. At that stage, the Stanford board was muchfarther along in its evolution of governance practices, and so on, than the Riceboard had been, although the Rice board has done dramatic improvementsthere. I served on both those boards and also on the board of the Carnegie Institutionof Washington [Carnegie Institution for Science], which is a researchorganization with laboratories around the country, including a plant biologylaboratory here at Stanford and a global ecology lab. I found that working ingovernance, being on the board of institutions that were well led withimportant charters and important outputs in terms of research and students,was very satisfying and educational as well. I learned an enormous amountfrom that. I did that until I became chairman of the board at Stanford in 2004,and then I stepped off the Rice board and off the Carnegie board and focusedtotally on Stanford until my term ended there at the end of ’04.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Your reason for withdrawing from Rice and Carnegie? McMurtry: The reason for that was once I was chairman at Stanford I really felt I had todevote all of my time and attention to that. It was inappropriate not to betotally focused there, and it was very enjoyable to do that as well. So I found itreally useful. I’ve also found that having spent seventeen years on the Riceboard and eleven years on the Stanford board and—I’ve forgotten howmany—seven or so on that Carnegie board—I learned a lot from [them],developed some great relationships which are sustaining, and I’m very, veryhappy that other people are now involved in the governance. There’s a time todo these things, and for me, even though I have a lot of energy and ambitionabout things that I want to do in the future, the governance phase of my lifefor nonprofits is, I think, over. I’ve done that and I’m looking to do otherthings.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Then briefly, what about philanthropic activities? Are you engaged there? 70 McMurtry: We’ve been quietly, very interested in philanthropy since we first began tohave any assets. The first thing that we did when we had anything other thancurrently disposable income was we set up scholarships at Rice, because Ricein 1965 began charging tuition. It had been tuition-free when we were there,which is why we went. And so we set up scholarships in honor of Deedee’sparents and my parents. They’re endowed and still running at Rice.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: For undergraduates? McMurtry: For undergraduates, yes. We felt obligated and very pleased to be able to dothat. We also funded a professorship in engineering at Rice and then laterfunded a professorship in the humanities. These are endowed professorships,and we have done a lot of other funding of various things at Rice. At Ricewe’re currently funding the development of a new residential college livingsituation that will be opening in August of this year. At Stanford we’ve been very involved with a lot of different things. I think thefirst thing we gave any money to was the Lively Arts program at Stanford,which is all of the wonderful musical and dance and other groups that theybring to the campus. We’ve been involved with engineering—we endowed achair in engineering there in the mid-eighties. We have provided funding tothe athletic department, to the Hoover Institution, to the Stanford Institute forEconomic Policy Research [SIEPR], to the art museum [Cantor Art Center].We’ve agreed to fund a new art building at Stanford, which will be builtbeginning in a couple of years, which is going to be very exciting. One thingthat Deedee and I will be spending our time on over the next several years ishelping to plan and execute that art building, which will be able to consolidatein one facility all of the different art activities at Stanford in a building thatwill be right adjacent to the Cantor Center, which is the museum.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Have you chosen an architect? McMurtry: No, I have not chosen an architect yet. We’re still working on that. But we’vealso been very involved with our church in Menlo Park—the Menlo ParkPresbyterian Church—for many, many years, and we’ve been involved with alot of different groups. If you look at our philanthropy, it is almost all about education as a tool foreconomic mobility. So we’ve also backed some things—people like VillageEnterprise Fund who are involved with microlending in Africa. We’ve backedthings like the Habitat for Humanity, which is a terrific program for buildinghousing. We’ve backed the American Conservatory Theater in San Francisco,[which] is something we’ve enjoyed for years. My wife has been involved with them on the board there for a number of years, and so we’ve been veryhappy supporters there. We’ve been supporting the Oregon ShakespeareFestival as well, and then a lot of entrepreneurial organizations—theentrepreneurs’ fund [Entrepreneurs Foundation] that Gib Myers set up—afoundation that helps companies get more entrepreneurial earlier.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh yes, he talked about that. McMurtry: There are a bunch of other related things. But the biggest chunks of thephilanthropy have gone, and are going, to Rice and to Stanford in a variety ofdifferent areas, and a lot of it in scholarships, but also in other areas. It’s beenfantastic to be in a position to be able to give back. We’ve been verydeliberate about our philanthropy, in that we tend not to give just becausethere’s a need—because there are so many needs you would be completelyoverwhelmed by that. We’ve tended to give where we feel the people whowill receive the gift will make unusual use of the gift and can really achievesomething that couldn’t otherwise be achieved. And we can get a lot ofpleasure from observing how that works.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I imagine there’s some interplay with your venture capital experience. McMurtry: With your charitable dollars, you’ve got a lot of the same issues.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, we’d probably better wind up, but I should give you a chance to saywhat you want to say without my prompting. McMurtry: I think I have very little to say other than one thing that came to mind as wewere talking a few minutes ago. I stumbled into what has been the mostdelightful virtuous cycle that one could find. That is, being in the venturecapital business because I loved starting things and helping to createcompanies, so I could be doing with my time those things that I most enjoyeddoing. It turned out to be, financially, enormously rewarding—well beyondanything that I would have ever imagined or set as a target or an objective.And that virtuous cycle is one that very few people are privileged to enjoy. Idid not seek it; I stumbled into it but thrived within it, and continue to enjoythe benefits of it and continue to enjoy the process of that creativity.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Very nice note to end. I thank you. McMurtry: Thank you. Great. Well, thank you guys for taking all the time. 
