Interviewer: It is the 18th of September, and this is the first interview with Tom Perkins.We’re in a conference room at Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers in SanFrancisco. As usual, I want to start at the beginning—namely with yourfamily, upbringing, education.Perkins: Okay. Well, I grew up in the East, a suburb of New York basically, WhitePlains, New York. I went to White Plains High School and was kind of a nerd.I was involved in a lot of technical things back then. I built kit television setsto sell to neighbors and friends, and I had a lot to do with little experiments inphysics and stuff that I was interested in, in my tiny little laboratory in mycloset in my bedroom.Nobody in my family had ever gone to college, and I wasn’t planning to goeither. Fortunately, I had a physics teacher, Mr. Wilson, who thought he sawsome talent in me, and he prevailed upon my parents to let me go to college.There wasn’t any money, so I had to get a scholarship in order to finance it.So I applied to both Harvard and MIT, and I got accepted to both, but MIThad a better scholarship so that’s where I went. And between the scholarshipand borrowing money from the institution and borrowing some money from arelative, I was able to do it. I was going to major in physics, and abouthalfway through the program I decided that I wasn’t smart enough to be verygood physicist, so that I should probably switch into something morepractical. So I switched into electronic engineering.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What made you think you weren’t smart enough?Perkins: [chuckling] My competition. Well, I was in a class with about five others inphysics, and one or two of those were just so brilliant that it was absurd tothink that I could swim in those waters.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So up until then you hadn’t been thinking particularly of practicality?Perkins: No, no. I think I was interested in the science of it all, and I still am. Still tothis day, I can’t resist reading— There’s a new biography that’s just come out,which I hope to get tomorrow, on Paul Dirac, and I can hardly wait to read it.Quantum theory, you know, I just love it. I’ve read bookcases full of stuff inscience, the history of science and all of that. Parenthetically, I think thatalmost uniquely among venture capitalists I have used my technical insightpretty consistently throughout my entire career. I have not been afraid of thetechnology, and I’ve been ready to plunge in, learn it, deal with it, and help itdevelop. I have not felt the need to call upon consultants to tell me what it wasall about. Not that we didn’t use consultants—of course we did. But thisnerdish aspect of my life has been pretty consistent, and still to this day.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But there are other venture capitalists, indeed some that I have talked with,who came out of technical backgrounds—engineering and that sort of thing.Are you saying that you used that background?Perkins: Well, I think what’s unique about Kleiner Perkins when Eugene Kleiner and Istarted it— We were not like any other firm, and we can get into that a bit, butI may be jumping too far.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, yes, but just finish that thought, that you were very technically oriented.Perkins: Not just that, but we were also very hands-on oriented. We would run thesecompanies; we would run them in the sense that we would get them startedwith very junior or inexperienced people, and we would provide everythingbut the key idea, which they had. We were willing to back, pretty much, ideasrather than teams of people. I think we were totally unique in that. That is amajor distinguishing feature of us, and it also explains our success.It’s very simple to understand. If somebody has a good idea and they want toraise money to start a company, to execute the idea, if it’s just at the ideastage, it’s going to be extremely hard to get other people that are any good towork in that venture. I mean, you are going to need a marketing person and amanagement, manufacturing, whatever. Why would anybody very good,particularly in the early days of venture capital before it was clear that thiswould all work, why would anybody very good do that? If you think about it,they wouldn’t, they really wouldn’t do it. So if you say, “I want a completeteam; I want to see the finance, the marketing, the manufacturing, thetechnology, the whole thing, everybody there, so I can see what I what I amgoing to invest in.” You will end up having to get rid of most of them (thepeople, that is) because they are no good! [laughter]It’s much better to take the technical risk out of it with the initial money,whatever the technical risk is. Kleiner and I were very, I think, good at this—figuring out how to use the least amount of money to get rid of whatever therisk in the deal was. It might have been marketing, technology, maybe legalpatents, whatever—reduce that and then pour in the money and then you canhire the good people and you’ve got a great venture. I think we kind ofinvented that, and back in the day we were all alone in doing venture capitalthat way.I mean, the Arthur Rocks of the world.Arthur is a financier in my opinion; he is not a management person. Hisapproach was completely different. Tommy Davis, Bryan and Edwards, BillDraper—I don’t mean to denigrate them, but they all worked on that earlier[model]: let’s look at the whole thing; we’ll put our money down and take ourchances. Kleiner and I said uh-uh, we’ll fill in the gaps personally, and we’llprobably finance the whole thing because nobody else will play the game theway we will. So anyway, we were different in that aspect, and of course itworked and now that has become— But what I’m saying now is no longerstartling, or different, or revolutionary, but in the beginning it was.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You are including in that financing the whole thing?Perkins: Financing the whole thing.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: People were taking pieces but not—Perkins: Well, no, if you look at our two big hits in the first investment fund,Genentech and Tandem Computers, we essentially financed it all. We did nothave partners.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You didn’t?Perkins: No, we didn’t have partners. We didn’t have partners. We did it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, well, I’ve let you jump ahead. It was my fault. Let’s go back to MIT.Perkins: Back to MIT, right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And what was it like? I’m imagining your family as not being extremelysophisticated. What was it like just coming from Illinois and landing in whatmust have been a very sophisticated setting.Perkins: Well, Illinois, and then White Plains, New York, and then MIT.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, White Plains. I’m sorry.Perkins: Well, my life changed totally. It turned out I was an excellent swimmer. Atone point I held the national record for about two weeks.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [laughter] That you’d started doing in high school?Perkins: No, no, we didn’t have a pool in high school. So I was not in any way athleticor a jock in high school, quite the reverse. I was the guy that always knew theanswers to the technical stuff but didn’t get invited to the parties. At MIT itturned out the first weekend I was there I tried out for the swimming team,and in the tryout I nearly broke the pool record. I came very close to it, whichjust astonished the coach. So of course he insisted I become— I becamecaptain of the freshman swimming team, and I swam for four years at MIT. Iwent from being a nerd in a school of jocks to a jock in a school of nerds,which was pretty amazing [chuckling]. So it changed my life.I joined a fraternity and I enjoyed— MIT is a tough school, and the highschool I went to, White Plains High School, did not teach calculus, which wasa requirement for MIT. But they waived it because I had excellent grades, butI needed the calculus. So the first year at MIT was just bewildering. I hadnever been thrown into anything so difficult in my life, but it worked.So I graduate. I am now an electronic engineer. I owed everybody money, so Ihad to make as much money as I could to pay it back—the school, myrelatives, the loans, and so on. So I went to work for the Sperry GyroscopeCompany overseas in some pretty tacky places. But they paid very well, and Italked about that in the book [Valley Boy: The Education of Tom Perkins]. Idid that for two years. I had decided when I graduated from MIT that I wantedto go into business, not that anybody in the family that had been in business oranything, but that I wanted a broader scope than just engineering. So I appliedto Harvard [Business School] and got accepted at Harvard and then had towork a couple years to make the money to pay for it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you realizing that money was the name of the game and maybe that wasa faster way to get to it?Perkins: I think, in the beginning, making a lot of money was not what I thought Icould or would do. I just wanted something more interesting than designingcircuits, although I was pretty good at designing circuits, but there is just moreto it than that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was this result of the blossoming of the social Mr. Perkins? Maybe havingmore chance to deal with people?Perkins: Probably. I don’t think I realized, until I got to Harvard, that I was pretty goodat dealing with people and that I thought in ways that would make it easy tomanage people. I wasn’t aware of that until I got to Harvard, and I foundHarvard almost trivially simple. Maybe it’s an egomaniacal thing to say, but Iwas surrounded by people that were just suffering from it all. This was themost difficult thing they had ever done, these cases and oh my God, andwriting them up and analysis and everything. To me, it was just fun and easyand trivial, almost. So I did very well at Harvard, and I think I began torealize, yes, you might be pretty good at this.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Before you leave Harvard, I need to hear your comments on Georges Doriot.Perkins: Oh yes, well he probably goes through a lot of the histories you’ve collected.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: He does! [chuckling]Perkins: Well, he was a remarkable man; he was a friend. I have been fortunate enoughto collect mentors along the way. This Mr. Wilson in high school was the first,and then Georges Doriot was certainly the second. He taught in the secondyear of the business school. He was rather controversial at Harvard because hedid not use the case method, which is what Harvard is based upon; instead helectured. But his course was very popular, and he was a very powerfulmember of the faculty, but kind of an exception.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why was he so popular?Perkins: Well, he was very popular with a certain kind of student, like me, who felt thata man like that who had accomplished what he had could indeed be a mentor,teach you, help you tremendously. There were other students who thought hewas just a windbag and didn’t respect him and wouldn’t have anything to dowith him. So the students kind of divided up. He was not universally popular,and it wasn’t extremely difficult to get— I mean his course was not rationed;you could take his course. Anybody that wanted to take it could get into it.However, I found him extraordinary. He was a wonderful mix; he wascharming, brilliant, very accomplished, very opinionated, and he was notembarrassed to teach a bunch of young men: this is the way you shouldbehave in life, literally.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And that must have been very different.Perkins: Very different. “Don’t drink too much.” I mean, we are talking really not onlyhow you should behave but this is the way other people that you will meet inbusiness will behave. I can remember him saying, “The chief financial officerwill drink scotch; the chief engineer will drink beer and get drunk on it.” Imean, crazy things like that. I mean, you could say, “This is a professor atHarvard? Come on!” [<|endoftext|>
Interviewer chuckles] But he was absolutely right! As youfind out. He had this wonderful French accent [imitating Doriot’s accent],“Gentlemen someday you will want to kill an engineer.” Well, of course, allthe time! [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Or an investment banker.Perkins: No, no. Well, I think maybe my bias against Wall Street started with him. Ihave a notorious bias against Wall Street, and maybe it started with GeorgesDoriot.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because he did?Perkins: Well, it’s so long ago, and every three or four years Wall Street gives you areason to hate them. This last iteration was unbelievable. If you looked at mybook [Valley Boy: The Education of Tom Perkins], I trash investment bankers,known I should have done it [the trashing] even more.The name of Doriot’s course was Manufacturing, not Finance.Manufacturing—a good business has to make something, sell it, satisfycustomers. The essence of business is manufacturing, which I agree with, andnot financial manipulations, and all of that. He did, I thought, a brilliant job ofteaching a bunch of young guys how to behave, and you either loved him oryou hated him. And I loved him.Maybe the second lecture that he gave, he said that he wanted the wholeclass—there was, I don’t know, maybe eighty people in the class, maybe notthat many—to break up into groups of about eight individuals per group,because you are going to work on projects. You are going to have to find twocompanies and consult for them and help them; and you are going to have towrite a paper on some topic that I (Doriot) will approve. So, a bunch of usformed a group, and then he said, “Now you must pick a leader of yourgroup.” And they picked me, and after that had happened, then he said, “Nowlet’s talk about who you picked and why did you pick your leader.” This isafterwards. He basically said, “You’ve picked the person that you would trustyour money with, and if you didn’t pick that person, you have not picked theright leader. Isn’t that interesting?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, it is.Perkins: Anyway, so I was the leader, and we did do two companies, and it was funand interesting, and then I invited him to join us at a dinner where the twocompanies got together, and that was a lot of fun. We were the first, I think, todo that. And then we picked a project which he did not approve. He thought itwas going to be too difficult for us to do, and he wanted me to pick somethingelse, and I said, “No, I think we can do it.” So he called me into his office andhe said, “Okay, well, I’ll make a deal with you. The other guys will getwhatever grade I think they ought to get, but you either get an A+ or I flunkyou. I said, “Well, what a great deal!” You know, “Get the A+ ready!”So, we did it; it worked out fine, and then he asked me to be his assistant forthe following year, which was a fairly big deal. He picked one student out ofhis class to be his assistant. But I’d met Dave Packard by then, so I turnedDoriot down. And then years later he asked me to come back and runAmerican Research and Development [Corporation]. And I wasn’t able to dothat.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I guess you made a hit.Perkins: Oh yes. When I went back to Boston I would go and see him and take him todinner, or sometimes I would eat at his house. He was an extraordinary man,wonderful. He was, of course, the first venture capitalist in the United Statesof the new mold in high-tech. J.P. Morgan—there’s been risk capital aroundforever, but I would say Doriot was the first to do high-tech venture capital.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Meaning AR&D?Perkins: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did he bring AR&D in a lot when he was lecturing?Perkins: No, no, he did not. Everybody knew what he was doing because there was alot of publicity about it. But he did not. Unfortunately, at the time when he setup AR&D he couldn’t, he didn’t structure it [correctly] so that he personallydidn’t make any money on it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Really?Perkins: That was the fatal flaw there. It was a public company, and in those days youcouldn’t participate in the profits.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you think that might have been deliberate on his part? I mean notdeliberate in the sense that he didn’t want to make money, but rather therewere other things that he found more important.Perkins: No, I think he screwed up, and I think he really screwed up. He tried for yearsto restructure it in some way.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So with all this fame he ended up not making much money?Perkins: Well, he made money in stock options and stuff in the companies that theybacked, but AR&D itself only could pay him a salary.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All right, so you obviously liked this course and the way he gave it. But whathappened when you went back to the tried-and-true Harvard case-studysystem?Perkins: Ninety percent of Harvard is the case method, and Doriot is an exception.When I think of Harvard I think of Doriot. But what I learned at Harvard wasfrom the cases. I think it’s an excellent way to teach and an excellent way tolearn.Incidentally, I taught for a year at Stanford in the business school, years ago,where they also use the case method. The difference between Harvard andStanford is in some ways day and night because at Stanford, even though theyuse the case method, the professor at the last five, ten minutes of the periodgives the right answer, or gives the answer. “Okay, this what you should havesaid and this is what should have been done.” At Harvard, never, never; theprofessor never said, “This is the right answer.” If the discussion was goingcompletely crazy he would try to bring it back. But there was no right answer,which is the way the world is! There’s no right answer in any of these things.I found that great, and I was able to, I guess, read the cases, study them,participate in the discussion, and come to what I felt was what should be donefor the following reasons, without having all the data possible that you couldhave. So I found it easy to deal with the case method. I guess I didn’t know itat the time, but writing is fairly easy for me. So there was a lot of writtenanalysis of these cases, and I found it rather easy to do. So, yes, Harvard waspretty cool.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Presumably, other than Doriot, there were other personal connections that youmade?Perkins: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is that another thing Harvard provides to its graduates?Perkins: No.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So that was the end of that.Perkins: Well, I can remember the names of a couple other professors but that’s aboutit. No, Doriot was an entirely different kind of person.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All right, enough on Harvard? Can we go to Hewlett Packard?Perkins: Yes, because HP was really a big thing in my career. So I was working for acompetitor of HP called the General Radio Company in Cambridge during thesummer, between years at Harvard, and I was doing a little consulting forthem, making money during the school season as well. The project they gaveme over the summer was to test instruments being made by this companycalled Hewlett-Packard out in California. Both companies were competitors.General Radio made voltmeters, oscillators, various kinds of electronic testequipment. The Hewlett-Packard equipment cost about a third of what theGeneral Radio equipment cost, and it didn’t look as good, but it was relativelyinexpensive. So General Radio hired me to— They had an instrumentationlaboratory to see how accurate the Hewlett-Packard equipment was, and did itdo what it said it would do. In every case it did as well or better than thespecification had guaranteed, and it was better than the General Radioequivalent, more accurate, even though it was less expensive. So I was veryimpressed with this equipment.General Radio was a bigger company than Hewlett-Packard, but HewlettPackard was growing fast and giving General Radio a lot of trouble. So, in mysecond year at Harvard I thought I was going to need a job. So I wroteHewlett-Packard and I explained what I had been doing and asked if I couldbe interviewed for a job. So I heard back from Dave Packard. He said, “We’regoing to be in New York in a few weeks at the electrical engineersconvention. Please come down and see us and we’ll interview you.” So I did. Iarrived at the convention, and there was Dave Packard and Bill Hewlett. Ofcourse they were young men in those days, and they were personally settingup their booth, just the two of them, which was shocking. I mean, GeneralRadio executives would have never done that. So I was there and I helpedthem. And we were talking and putting it all together. By the time we had itall together Dave Packard said, “We’re going to make you an offer,” and acouple of weeks later I got an offer.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now, had they looked into you other than your letter?Perkins: Well, no, I don’t think so. In those days they didn’t even have a personneldepartment. So I never talked to anybody else. I had no thought ofinterviewing on Wall Street. It was anathema to me; that’s from Doriotprobably, but there’s just something about it. I never liked Wall Street.Anyway, so I got in my car and drove across the United States and startedwith Hewlett-Packard.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What was going on in your mind? You saw that their equipment was cheapand good, if not beautiful?Perkins: It wasn’t terrible looking; it wasn’t as luxurious-looking. The General Radiostuff was in varnished cases with black crackle, and it really looked great. Butinside it wasn’t any better. I was tremendously impressed by Dave Packardand Bill Hewlett from the two or three hours I spent with them in New York,helping them with the booth. It just was obvious to me if I could work forthese two people I would learn everything. And I liked them; they seemed tobe having fun; they were successful. I couldn’t see any negatives at all.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What did you think about going that far away? You were an East Coast boy.Perkins: Well at the time I figured I’ll give it a couple of years. I had already spent acouple of years traveling around the world working for Sperry Gyroscope, andI did think I would probably settle in the East because that’s where I grew upand everything. But I figured well, a couple years, why not? I’d never been toSan Francisco or Northern California. But I had some friends that had livedhere some years before. They were old friends of my family, and they justextolled the San Francisco Bay Area. I had this idea that San Francisco wasthe place, which of course it is, as we all know.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] We all agree.Perkins: So I got out here, and I was living in Palo Alto, and I loved it. Again, I don’twant to always talk to the book, but instead of starting off in management, Istarted off in the machine shop.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now that surprised me in reading your book. Here you were with a HarvardMBA. Was that really the way your education should have been used?Perkins: Well, yes, but it was a bit of a surprise. There were two problems. First of all,Hewlett-Packard was a very small company when I arrived. It was, I think,$25 million a year, the whole thing.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And maybe how many employees?Perkins: Growing fast, oh gosh, I don’t know—a few thousand. I’d have to think aboutthat, a few thousand. But, it didn’t feel like a small company; well it wasn’t asmall company. In those days $25 million a year was pretty good revenue. Butcompared to what finally happened, it was nothing, of course. And I thinkthey had hired one MBA before me, from Stanford, and the managers of thecompany were all engineers. There was a hostility on the part of the managersto the idea that you can go to a business school and learn how to manage andthen come in and manage. That’s just not right [they felt].Packard and Hewlett, they were geniuses of course. I think the first MBA theyhired was kind of an accountant. I was in a way the first MBA expected to runthings that they ever hired. Packard thought, we just have to deal with this. So,he said, “I want you to work in the machine shop for six months and learnhow to make a good product”—well, also the assembly lines, but mostly themachine shop. He didn’t say it, but what he meant is, let’s see how you getalong with the people.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So he was very aware of the stigma?Perkins: Yes, can you do this, in other words. So, I said fine. What else could I say? SoI did and it worked. I wasn’t a very good machinist.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you being paid as a machinist too?Perkins: No, I was being paid as an MBA, so I was a very highly paid machinist. But Iwas working as a machinist, period. I mean there was no other, nothing elsewas going on. I did it for several months, and then I got the call, “Well okay,now come on into the marketing department.” I worked for Noel Eldred whowas the original vice president of marketing for the company, and that’s sortof how I started. I had a lot of contact with Packard and Hewlett and NoelEldred and Noel Porter. These are the grand names from Hewlett-Packard,and I got to know them all very well.There was a fair amount of socializing that we did back then. Packard andHewlett had a ranch, still have it. You know, the company was small enough,and they were everywhere in evidence enough so that I was able to see howthey did it. They were brilliant entrepreneurs. I really think everything Ilearned about entrepreneurship, I learned from them. And they taught. Therewould be a lot of meetings where we’d review projects, and they wouldexplain to everybody, “This is what we’re going to do, and this is why we’redoing it, and this is what it means, and this is how it fits.” They were verydidactic and tutorial in almost a surprising way. They spent a lot of timeeducating their managers, much more than I had seen anywhere else or thatI’ve ever seen since, really. It was just tremendous for all of us. There’s awhole cadre of people of that era that— We just worshipped Hewlett andPackard, particularly Packard.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why do you say that?Perkins: Well, they were two very different, very complicated geniuses. Dave wasalways the boss. They had an amazing relationship between the two of them,which a lot of people have written about and speculated about and everything.But I honestly can’t say; I don’t know how they did it. Hewlett would followPackard, but it was very clear that he was also influencing Packard. So thingshappened between the two of them that—who knows? Packard would be theleader, but Hewlett was a big influence on Packard. That’s, I guess, a simpleway to say it. Packard had a violent temper and would get very angry veryquickly, and it could be very frightening. Except that, [chuckling] I don’tknow, maybe it’s arrogant for me to say it, but he didn’t scare me, and I’d justargue with him about whatever.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did he like that?Perkins: Well, he never said go away, and we’d thrash things out. Well, of course, he’sthe boss, and you have to use some common sense. But I never feltintimidated by him. Hewlett, on the other hand, was much more friendly andeasier with people, but I felt deep down was a tougher cookie. But anyway, Iworked for both of them directly for years.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you have the feeling that they kind of worked things out privatelytogether?Perkins: Absolutely, oh absolutely.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So they came in with a coordinated picture.Perkins: Absolutely. They never argued with each other—ever. I don’t remember asingle dispute. And they’d say, “This is not like at home where if mommywon’t do it daddy will. Uh, uh, this is it. Don’t try to play us.” So I worked forthat small company for a couple of years. I got very restless; I went intomanagement consulting for a year. I quit. And I went to work for Booz Allen& Hamilton.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You mean you were restless at HP?Perkins: Yes, yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why? With all of this good stuff happening?Perkins: Restlessness is the horror of my existence.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You’d just been there too long, regardless.Perkins: Yes, I wasn’t running the place, you know. Well, I had been there for twoyears, and I wasn’t the boss.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How old were you?Perkins: This is 1958 and 1959, so I was twenty-six, twenty-seven.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, you certainly wouldn’t be CEO of Hewlett-Packard.Perkins: Right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Does this say something about Tom Perkins?Perkins: Oh, sure. So I quit and went to work for a management consultant company,Booz Allen & Hamilton<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now, why them?Perkins: Well, they were the best. They had the best reputation. They paid a lot ofmoney. I mean I kind of doubled my salary with them from Hewlett-Packard.I hated it; it was a terrible mistake. For all kinds of reasons I didn’t like it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, give me a slight clue.Perkins: Well, I was in the San Francisco office; I think it was on Montgomery Streetright here in San Francisco, and it was a very small office. There were onlylike four individuals, a couple partners and a couple worker bees. And theywere bidding jobs, and the jobs were very small, like a week or two weeks’work to solve whatever problems somebody had. And it just wasn’t enoughtime to do it properly, and there was such a diversity of things. I was literallyjust traveling every day to get the data, and then write the report, and then onto the next job. I only stayed there for a year, and I must have had at least adozen or maybe fifteen jobs. Some were interesting but most were not, and Irealized I could never make a career of this. I had made a huge mistake.So I contacted Packard, and said, “Can I come back?” And he said, “Yes, youcan. But Bill and I have just invested in a venture called Optics Technology.They’re looking for a guy to run the commercial side of it and maybe thatwould appeal to you. Maybe you should take a look at that.” It sounded goodto me, so I flew back to Chicago and met Narinder [Singh] Kapany, who has aPhD in optics and allegedly invented fiber optics.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why allegedly?Perkins: Well, he is a very controversial person—and there are those who would say hestole all of the ideas. I’m not saying that, but there are those that will.Anyway, that’s when I met Don [Donald L.] Lucas. So the venture money wascoming in from Draper, Gaither & Anderson, which I’m sure you knowabout—one of the first VC [venture capital] outfits here in Palo Alto. DonLucas was quarterbacking Optics Technology. I did it, and again my salarydropped from twice HP to about half HP, but I got stock in the company. So ifthey made it, I’d make a lot of money.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And you were thinking that? I mean, was that one of the appeals?Perkins: Yes, oh yes, yes. By then I thought I wanted to make some money. It turnedout Narinder Kapany and I just detested each other, I mean just to this day.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It was a personality clash? Or was it more than that?Perkins: It was everything. Kapany in my opinion was a phony. I don’t think he hadthe scientific credentials he claimed, and he certainly didn’t have themanagement skills he claimed. He was a fraud. A very attractive, charmingguy, a Sikh, you know, with a turban and beard, big booming personality, abig booming laugh, a charming person. He charmed a lot of money out ofinvestors, but there was really nothing behind it, and just a handful of littlewidgets and stuff, mostly that I had put together.So Narinder and I just simply battled for four years. I stuck it out for fouryears; it was quite a long time. This is a long story, but I finally quit. I justcouldn’t stand it, because I felt it was doomed. I quit at the time when thestock market was really hot, so they were able to take Optics Technologypublic and the stock went up. I had to give all my stock back; I didn’t make apenny on it. And then about a year later, it all crashed, and there was nothingleft. I was right. But frequently I am right but too early in my timing. Soanyway, I once again called Dave Packard and said, “Can I come back?” Hesaid, “Sure.” So, I came back and in the meanwhile—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Excuse me, but would that flexibility happen today? What was this, thesecond time you asked to come back?Perkins: Yes, I quit Hewlett-Packard four times! [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: In more ways than one you’re indebted to HP.Perkins: Well, twice as a kid and then two as—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I think we have to give Tom Perkins some credit here. I’m sure theywould not have accepted any Joe Blow.Perkins: No, I don’t think they would have either. I think Packard saw in me someonelike himself: very hard-driving, highly motivated, a maybe intelligententrepreneur with a lot of skills. I think he saw that, and he was happy to bringme back into the fold. But the company had grown very rapidly during thefour and a half, almost five years. During that period, it had gone from $30-$40 million to probably $500 million. So it was getting to be a pretty bigcompany. And it had gone from a couple of divisions to, I think, seventeendivisions. Now it had a personnel department, and it had all the things that youwould expect it to have. But it was still a very entrepreneurial company.Hewlett decided he wanted to have a centralized research department, becausethey had been doing all of their engineering development division by divisionscattered around the country. They set up the divisions near universities sothat they could have that great academic/industrial link.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now was that somewhat unique?Perkins: Yes. That was, I think, Packard’s idea, or maybe it was Hewlett’s idea—Idon’t know. They did it all over the place. They did it in Colorado, in Oregon,back East, always a university link. They invented that in a way. It’s no longerso appropriate for other complicated reasons, but at the time it was brilliant,absolutely brilliant.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You mean it’s no longer appropriate for that particular type of industry?Perkins: Let me withdraw that. I think it still works; it just isn’t probably as importantnow as it used to be because there’s more centralization now.What year is this? This is probably 1962 or 1963, something like that. So,Hewlett wanted to set up HP Laboratories, Hewlett-Packard Laboratories, andhe put in charge of it, Dr. Bernard Oliver. I use the word genius a lot, butBarney Oliver was, is, was absolutely a genius, but the least practical personyou would ever meet. So Hewlett felt that Barney should have anadministrative backup to help him do all this stuff. So that was me. I helpedBarney hire people, get space, do budgets, set up project managementprocedures, all the infrastructure that you would need for a laboratory. It was apretty big success.We got it all set up, and then Hewlett and Packard both used it to trigger newinitiatives for the company. They were brilliant at this. Hewlett used HP Labsto develop the calculators and the handheld calculators, and Packard used it todevelop the computer, the Hewlett-Packard computer. So these wereimportant diversifications, and they were both immensely successful, thatcouldn’t have been done any other way, I think. So I was like in the machineshop boiler room doing all of that stuff with them, for them, deeply involvedin it all. I’m kind of jumping ahead. So I did that for a couple of—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: May I ask you something? I may be misinterpreting, but it seems to me thatyou’re taking more and more leave of your science background, that you’regetting much more into administration/business.Perkins: Well, sure, but remember this is all high-tech stuff.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right. So you’ve got to do both.Perkins: Yes. So I would say no. If anything I was learning more about technology, notless.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Okay. But you’re not doing it?Perkins: No. I’m not doing circuit boards, no. But I understood it all, and I could hangin there.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, you had to, didn’t you?Perkins: Yes, sure.Now there are two things that happen here more or less at the same time. I didthe University Labs and the computer thing, and this is the most difficult thingto explain because I don’t think you could conceivably do both now, and itwas pretty much unheard of even then.Okay, so I have come back to Hewlett-Packard; I am now administrativemanager of the research labs. One morning I had this idea on how to make alaser really practical. Lasers had been invented and existed, but they were veryexpensive, cumbersome, difficult to operate, etc. I don’t know if it was in theshower or wherever, but I got this idea of how to make a laser like a lightbulb. It would be cheap—it either worked or you threw it away. It would berugged, foolproof—all you had to do was connect it to the electricity and itwould work.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because existing ones were not foolproof.Perkins: Elaborate laboratory pieces of equipment. No, there wasn’t much of a marketfor a laser other than as a curiosity. But that turned out— That was a ratherbig market, because every university in the world wanted to have a laser, andevery junior college and even high schools.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But you didn’t know that at that time?Perkins: No, I had a sense that that would be half true. I also had a sense that therewere a lot of things you could do with those lasers if you could have apractical one. Well, I discussed this with a guy named Dick Jaenicke, whoworked for me at Optics Technology, and who was still at Optics Technology.We kicked it around and we decided yes, this could be done, and yes, it wouldwork.So I decided I wanted to start a venture to make lasers. But having quitHewlett-Packard foolishly once before, I didn’t want to quit Hewlett-Packardagain. So I went to Dave Packard—and this is absolutely extraordinary—and Ishowed him my invention. I’d sketched on a piece of paper my idea and howit would work. And I had total trust in him that he wasn’t going to steal it, andof course he would understand it. I said, “Dave, I really want to do this, and Ican do it on weekends. I don’t want to quit Hewlett-Packard, but I wouldreally like to try this.” And astonishingly he said, “Okay, just don’t let it get inthe way.” Now, I can’t think of anybody else in America that would have said“Yes, okay.” They would have said, “No, you’ve either got to work for me ordo this on your own.” And then he would have probably said, “Besides, itisn’t going to work, and you’ll run out of money,” and all this stuff, all thenegatives—none of that from Packard.So then I persuaded my wife [Gerd Thune-Ellefsen Perkins] to let me take ourlife savings, which was like $15,000, which we had been saving to buy ahouse, and to put it into financing the development of this tube. I called it alaser tube; in fact, I called it the Lasertron, to make it sound like a klystron ora magnetron, to give it a little marketing pizzazz. I guess we’ve got time toexplain how I did it.[End Audio File 1]Perkins: The first thing, and I suppose the most important for me, was the laser, and inorder to pull it off with only $15,000 of capital I had to figure out some waysto do it very inexpensively. I had an acquaintance that was a glass blower overin Berkeley on University Avenue. So I made a deal with him that I’d givehim a third of the company if he would make the first 100 tubes—do all thedevelopment and make the first 100 tubes. And then I gave Dick Jaenicke, thisguy that worked for me at Optics Technology, a third of the company to workthere and make it happen. I kept a third of the company and became chairmanand put in the money, and it worked.After a few false starts, the invention worked and we started to make theselasers, and the company was very successful. We applied the laser to not justscientific applications, which was our entrée. We made a little kit so youcould make holograms, which were a big thing in those days, and we sold thelaser and the kit and all that. We sold a lot of them to the university andcollege market.But then we had—I didn’t have, but a guy that worked there had—the idea oflaying sewer pipe with this laser, using it to line up the angles that you need,because sewer pipe has to go in straight line. If it goes like that [indicating aturn] you have a big problem. In the construction industry, it’s a big dealbecause you had to survey. You had a surveying crew to go over hill and daleand determine how deep the trenches had to be dug and all of that. With ourlaser you just dig a hole. The laser was foolproof; it would work under water;you could run it from a battery. You just shine the light down the trench andput a little plastic target at the end of the pipe, and if the red dot is in themiddle of the plastic target, you know it is straight, and you just keep going.So you could eliminate the whole surveying crew. And we sold the thing for, Ithink, $3,000, and our cost was, I don’t know, very little—$300, maybe $200.The contractors could pay for our laser on their first job, so we just sold thosethings. We started making money hand over fist.I’m running quickly through this, and I’m going to get back to what I wasdoing at Hewlett-Packard. But the laser company was becoming a big success.We had several hundred employees, and it had reached the point where Ieither had to go work there myself, because it was making a lot of money forme—and Dick. I bought out the third partner along the way, so it was a prettygood deal.I explored taking it public with Hambrecht and Quist, which was a hotinvestment bank outfit in San Francisco in those days. Bill [William R.]Hambrecht is still around; George Quist unfortunately died. And George Quistsaid, “No, no, no, you don’t want to do that. What you want to do is mergethis thing into Spectra-Physics. We’ve taken Spectra-Physics public, and it’sgot everything, but they don’t make any money. You guys make the money;we could just put these things together. You’ll end up owing most of SpectraPhysics, and you will get immediate liquidity, and you don’t have to quitHewlett-Packard.” So that’s what I did.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You worked at Hewlett-Packard five days a week and at UniversityLaboratories only on weekends?Perkins: Nights and weekends, yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you must have had good people.Perkins: Yes, sure we did. Dick Jaenicke was very good. When we sold it, I think hewas only twenty-three or twenty-four years old, and he retired. [chuckling]And he’s never worked since.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I notice that you didn’t retire.20Perkins: No, no.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But you could have, I’m assuming.Perkins: I could have; I could have retired. I didn’t want to.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You made a lot of money?Perkins: Yes, yes, for those days, you know; nothing by current standards. But, youknow, a few million dollars back in the sixties was a lot of money.Okay, so Packard knew what I was doing, but he didn’t pay much attention toit. He knew that my company was successful, but he didn’t pay muchattention to it. So when I sold the company to Spectra-Physics, merged it intoSpectra-Physics, it was in the paper. He came roaring into my office, and Ithought oh my God, he is just going to kill me. Just the reverse. He justthought it was the greatest thing because it had never interfered with HewlettPackard at all. He just thought it was wonderful, what I had done. Interesting.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But on the other hand, it was right down his line.Perkins: I was his boy; I was doing what he did way back.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And in a field that he knew all about.Perkins: Well, he didn’t know about optics, but he knew it was technology.So meanwhile, at Hewlett-Packard, I’m running the research laboratory—notrunning it; I’m the administrative manager of it. But except for the technicaldecisions I was kind of running it. And the calculator had been an enormoussuccess, and that was Hewlett’s baby, and then Packard wanted to have acomputer to use to control Hewlett-Packard instruments. So the idea wasobvious; you would have a computer, and you could do tests, automatedtesting of things, and you could sell these into the military market, and soforth, which was a big market for HP in those days.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now was that a new idea?Perkins: New idea— Well, computers, of course, existed. Digital Equipment had itscomputer, and IBM had a bigger computer, but HP did not invent thecomputer.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I know that.Perkins: But they made a very, very good computer because they built the computer toHP’s standards for vibration and temperature and humidity. It was rugged,whereas the Digital Equipment and IBM computers were not.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What about cost?Perkins: Well, it was competitively priced. It was okay. It was not any cheaper, but itwas not any more either. So the computer was invented, and then it wastransferred down into the Palo Alto division to be manufactured and sold. Andthe Palo Alto division was obviously in Palo Alto; it was down at Page Milland El Camino basically. The rest of the company was up on the hill in theStanford Park, and that’s where the research laboratories were.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: The location is not incidental, is it? I imagine the division fed into thecomputer science at Stanford, right?Perkins: Not in those days.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So it could have been anywhere?Perkins: It could have been anywhere. But unfortunately what happened was—and I’vetried to explain this in my book, and I don’t how interesting it is toanybody—but the computer transformed Hewlett-Packard Company, totally.And I was lucky enough to be on the cutting edge of that. What happened isthey transferred the computer down to this Palo Alto division, and it had adivision manager and a sales manager, and manufacturing—everything. Andthey didn’t sell a single computer for twelve months, not one, not one.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] Was your heart in your stomach?Perkins: I had nothing to do with this. I was still up in the research lab; it wasn’t myproblem, wasn’t my problem.Packard, who had a violent temper, finally called a meeting to find out why,what’s wrong? So all the engineers, I mean there must have been twenty orthirty engineers, and a bunch of other people. I was invited and I went. Well,you can imagine, all the engineers had technical reasons: it doesn’t haveenough index or the I/O speed and the memory, and the blabeddy-jabeddy.And it went on for hours, and Packard is just getting madder and madder andmadder, because he’s saying, “Well, how could we have made all of thesemistakes?” And I didn’t say anything, and finally he said, “Well, Tom, whatdo you think?” And I said, “Dave when everything else fails, try selling. Ithink the salesmen are terrified of the computer.” And he didn’t pick up on it.He just said, “Grrrraaa,” you know, and went on.The next day—I didn’t think anything further about it—he came by my desk,and he said, “What do you mean? What did you say?” And I said, “Well,Dave, I don’t know anything about this computer. It’s a highly specializedthing. The only people that understand it are the guys that invented it. But Iknow a little more about it than the salesmen do, and I know I would have ahell of a time selling this because I would make a fool of myself trying to sellthis product to somebody that knows anything about computers. And thesalesmen can make their quota just selling the stuff they have always beenselling, and they just don’t want to touch it. Again he didn’t say anything, buthe heard me, and he disappeared.So two weeks later I get a call that both Hewlett and Packard want to havelunch with me at their club, the Palo Alto Club, which I had never been to.This is a pretty big deal. And meanwhile the laser company was booming, andI thought maybe they were upset about the laser; I didn’t know what it was.Anyway, so we went and we had the lunch, and at the end of the lunch—we’dbeen talking a little bit but not too much about the computer—Packard said,“Okay, wise guy, it’s your problem, take it on.”Well, I had been transferred from the labs to be the marketing manager of thePalo Alto division. I got there, and of course there were a lot of people; it wasa big division. I was absolutely convinced that I was correct and that we didn’thave to change the product in any way. But we had to change absolutelyeverything about the marketing, everything. We had to have specialists thatunderstood the computer; we had to promote it in the ways that you canpromote computers; we had to have OEM [original equipment manufacturer]discounts, things that the Hewlett- Packard Company never had had.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What’s an OEM discount?Perkins: Original equipment manufacturer. I’ll get into this, don’t worry. I’m spendinga lot of time on this Hewlett-Packard thing because it is the cornerstone of myventure capital career.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That’s fine.Perkins: So that’s why it’s worth talking about. Okay, the fundamental problem wasthat Hewlett-Packard had started by using manufacturer’s representativesaround the world who did not work for the company; they worked on acommission. And then along the way, shortly after I came back to thecompany to go into the research labs, Dave and Bill began to acquire thesemanufacturer’s reps, and they bought them, and then they became full-timeHewlett-Packard salesmen. But that was just a change in the ownership; theystill were behaving the same way.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So in other words they weren’t highly trained about HP products.Perkins: Well—yes, they knew HP products. They sold HP, Varian, and two or threeother lines, but HP was becoming most of their business.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, I see. So it wasn’t just exclusively HP?Perkins: No. They represented, typically, Varian Associates, and then different oneshad other lines. But as the years flowed, HP was becoming like 80 percent oftheir business. So it had to happen. I mean, they were acquired, and theyneeded to be acquired, and they were happy to be acquired, and everybodymade money, and all that. But nothing changed; every Hewlett-Packardsalesman sold every Hewlett-Packard product. There was a catalog, and therewas no specialization of any kind. So this computer comes along which is ahighly specialized thing; it’s a big deal; it takes a long time to understand allthis stuff. Nobody had trained anybody; there was nothing in place to facilitatethe salesmen to deal with this thing. I basically said to Packard, “I have prettymuch got to create my own sales force.” And he went, “Grrr, grrr, grr.” So Iwent to Noel Eldred, who was the vice president of marketing, who only hadtwo years to go before he retired, and he said, “No way, NO WAY.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because he would lose control?Perkins: He would lose control. Eldred said, “There are seventeen divisions; you arejust one. They all want their own sales forces. I am not going to—” And helooked me right in the eye—and he liked me! He said, “Tom, I am not goingto let you make my life a misery. You know? No.” I had to go back toPackard. This is not good business practice to go around your boss [Eldred],and all that stuff. So, I had to do that.I got permission to start hiring salesmen away from Digital Equipmentbecause they understood this stuff. And so I hired eight of them initially andscattered them around the United States, brought them all back, trained themon our product, got them back into the field. And immediately the businesstook off. I mean just like that! Once the salesmen realized it’s a good productand all we need is one of these specialists to help us, they started to sell themlike crazy. So the business grew. It’s hard to describe how fast it grew. It wascompounding at 30 to 50 percent a quarter, I mean, just like that. So westarted hiring, growing, everything.The salesmen were the crucial thing. But I had to change the advertising, thetradeshow promotion, the public relations, the way we manufactured—and theway we treated our engineers. We had a lot of software engineers, and theydidn’t like to wear shoes. So I bought carpet for them, and they didn’t have towear shoes. Well this, this just upset the rest of the company. I mean, it’sridiculous and hard to even describe how upsetting I was—Tom Perkins—tothat whole organization.My boss, who was the manager of the Palo Alto division, had basically anervous breakdown, I think because of me. Because it was organized chaos,and he just couldn’t do it. So Packard said, “Well all right, you run it.” So Ibecame the division manager, and the division went from nothing, or verysmall, to the largest division in the company in about two-and-a-half to threeyears. And everything was different about it: our margins, our marketingexpense, R&D expense; it didn’t look like any of the other divisions. Bookshave been written about how marvelous Hewlett-Packard is, and managementby-walking-around, and all that stuff. I’m not denigrating that. Dave and Billhad seventeen divisions, but they were all the same; they were all the samebusiness—no difference really between voltmeters and microwaves and thatstuff. So, they could manage it by just looking at ratios. You’re supposed tospend 15 percent on engineering, 5 percent on marketing, or whatever,whatever. But here’s a division, the computer division—everything isdifferent. No relationship.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, hadn’t you created a startup within a corporation?Perkins: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And that didn’t fit?Perkins: It didn’t fit. So there were constant battles. Now I had really a greatrelationship with Hewlett and Packard, and I had a great relationship witheverybody that worked for me in the division, and they are all famous. Bill[William H.] Davidow, and Bill [William L.] Abbott, and Roy [L.] Clay, allthese guys that have subsequently done great things in Silicon Valley. Thatwas great, but my relationship with my fellow division managers wasabsolutely awful. They hated me; they just hated me!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, they probably hated you not only because you were doing thingsdifferently, but because you were doing it so well.Perkins: Well, and I was getting a lot of publicity.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, you were making money, too.Perkins: Making money; we were very profitable, the whole thing. But when I say theyhated me, when the idea of my coming onto the Hewlett-Packard board firstcame up, a couple of them came out of retirement to go to the company andsay, “Don’t ever do that; it would be a catastrophe.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Really. So it wasn’t just a passing animosity.Perkins: No, they really hated me; they really hated me. There were just endlessclashes, and there were some famous battles between Packard and myself. Irealized that we could not only use our computer in our instrument systems,but we could use them in other people’s instruments and products, and so on.But in order to do that you have to sell it at a discounted price so that they canmake the margin when they resell it, and this is called the OEM, originalequipment manufacturer. It’s a margin thing.The company never discounted anything. If you bought one voltmeter it was$400; if you bought 4,000 voltmeters, each one was $400, that’s it. Period.And Packard genuinely believed that it was illegal to have discounts, and insome ways it is, that you have to do it in special ways. But anyway, we had tohave these discounts in order to sell lots of computers.We had a famous meeting where I proposed the whole thing, and Packard justabsolutely got furious, and he just said, “NO.” He slammed the table, and hegot up, and he stormed out of the room. I’m sitting there, and Hewlett said,“Well, Tom, what are you going to do?” But Hewlett was no fool; Hewlettknew I was right. And I said, “Bill, I’ll be back.” So I got all of the expertopinion, legal advice, and everything, and I went back two weeks later, put itall down in front of Dave, and he started to go through it, and he said, “Yes,yes, yes.” Done. [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: He’d been thinking about it!Perkins: Well, I think why I liked him so much is that even though he could get very,very angry, it wasn’t personal. You know? I was doing it for—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And he didn’t hold it.Perkins: No, he didn’t hold it. There was another famous one where we developed thefirst time-sharing system, which was a technology that has sort of come andgone. But the idea was a central computer hosting a large number of dumbterminals. You know, the idea disappeared, and then it came back, so it’s stillaround, time-sharing computers. But anyway, we made one, and it was— Ithink we sold it for about $100,000, and it would support, as I remember,thirty teletype machines in those days, you know, these cranking, out-punch,paper-tape machines. But it was pretty good, and we started to sell quite a fewof those, and they competed with IBM. The rest of the company sold to IBM.IBM was one of the largest customers for Hewlett-Packard instruments. So theother division managers were just having a fit, and they went to Noel Eldred,the vice president, and said, “You’ve got to stop Perkins! He’s going todestroy our business with IBM.” [chuckling] Which was nonsense; it wouldn’thave mattered, but anyway. So they deputized Packard to come down and dealwith me. He came in; you know the usual, “Grrrrr.” And I said, “Well, Dave,first of all, I think the parts of IBM that are buying my computers, ourcomputers, don’t have any idea about the rest of Hewlett-Packard.” And Isaid, “Do you want to see how we’re actually doing in this business?” Well,so I show him the numbers, Well, we were making 70 to 75 percent margins.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It’s hard to argue with that.Perkins: It’s unbelievable. And we’d sold millions, a few million dollars—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And he didn’t know that?Perkins: No, he didn’t know that in that detail, no. I showed him the data, he said,“Well, I think it’s all right to keep continuing.” [laughter] So we had this greatthing. So I’m running the largest division of the company pretty soon.Then Packard went back to Washington to be the Deputy Director of Defense.Hewlett is now running the company, and Hewlett had never run anything.The company is growing very fast; the computers are growing very fast, andthere were problems. There were budgets and getting resources and peopleand space. I mean, we needed a lot of physical space because in those days wemade everything under one roof; we didn’t sub it out the way you do now. Wehad these management meetings where everybody would be there, and I wasreally pretty vocal and complaining that we weren’t running the place right.After about six months of Packard being gone, roughly six months, Hewlettinvited me up, and I honestly thought he was going to fire me,because I hadbeen pretty outspoken. I also had my laser company, and I had bought aFerrari, and I had all— There were plenty of reasons to fire me. [chuckling]And Hewlett said basically, “You don’t have to do this. If you want to keepyour computer division, that’s fine. But if you’d like it, I would like you tocome up here and take the office next to mine and help me run this place.”And I said, “Well, what would I do? I mean, you’re running it.” And he said,“Well, it would be a staff job, but any ideas you’ve got that are good, we’lldo.” And I said, “Well, what would my title be?” And he said, “I don’t haveany idea; you invent one.” So, I did. I called myself Director of CorporateDevelopment.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now why did you do it?Perkins: Why did I do it? Because— Well, the challenge. [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I should have known!Perkins: I mean how exciting, right? By this time the company was $700 million or so.It was pretty clear it was going to be a giant company, but it wasn’t going toget there doing it the way we were doing it. I think Packard had taken thecompany as far as he could take it with his seat-of-the-pants, hands-on style.Hewlett was much more hypothetical, theoretical, willing to look intoalternative structures and different ways of doing things.I talked a bit about it in the book [Valley Boy], but I reorganized the companythanks to the old Boston Consulting Group, which was a new company at thattime. They were sort of the first really good management consultants—notlike Booz Allen & Hamilton—on matters of strategy and growth and marketsand so forth. They had a free seminar on how their whole scheme worked,back in Boston. I went back; it was a two-day thing, and in two days I got it.[chuckling] But I didn’t need to hire them. I came back, and I explained it allto Hewlett and implemented, and he said, “Yes.” The whole essence of it isbased upon investments in terms of market share, and so forth. Anyway, wereorganized the company, and that’s what we did.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now, was this all cutting edge?Perkins: Well, yes and no. I mean, Boston Consulting existed. Their first big client inAmerica was Texas Instruments. They helped Texas Instruments become thebig deal that it did become, and I would say Hewlett-Packard was the second.But they had nothing to do with it; I mean I stole their ideas—which theyinvited me to steal. And so we put that in place, and I think it’s fair to say thatif we hadn’t done that Hewlett Packard would have never gotten into themulti-billions the way it has, and I was pretty proud of that. So I did that fortwo or three years, and then Packard came back and— Well, two things: firstof all he did not like a lot of what I had done. I think incorrectly, his attitudewas, all this market-share stuff; you just make the best product, and if it’s anygood you’ll get the market share. Well, it’s not quite that simple, you know?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You were going against his model.Perkins: I was going against his model. Hewlett liked it, but Packard took over thecompany again. But it had gone so far that it never got changed back. So Ikind of won the battle. They liked me very much, but Packard said, “Look, Iam going to do what you’ve been doing, and so we’ll find another division foryou to run.” But I knew that because the computer division had already beengiven to somebody else, they couldn’t give it back to me. And I knew the onlydivisions that probably needed a new manager were in Colorado or back East,and I didn’t want to go there. So I came in the next morning and said, “Thankyou, thank you, thank you, but I’m going to go into the venture capitalbusiness.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now, had you just dreamed that up?Perkins: No, no, I had been kicking it around. But the trigger was Packard returning. Ihad talked to Doriot; this is before I became Hewlett’s assistant and while Iwas still running the computer division. He wanted me to come back and runAR&D. And I looked at it pretty hard, but there was no way to restructureAR&D to make it financially viable for me. So I could have had the glory ofrunning it, but I wouldn’t have made much money. I talked to him at lengthabout that, and I turned it down. In fact, it never did get restructured; it gotsold to Textron. Doriot never solved the problem, so he sold the whole thingand did not make any money on it. So I had flirted around with that, and I hadtalked to Bill Davidow, who subsequently became a venture capitalist, and aguy named Jack McKittrick, who also did, about maybe doing something. ButI didn’t.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Doing something, but not venture capital?Perkins: Yes, venture capital. Setting up a venture capital fund. But a whole mixture ofthings [for my not doing venture capital right away]. The challenge ofworking for Hewlett came, and I wanted to do that instead. I’m glad I didthat— Well, it speaks for itself, I mean, it was a pretty good job. So then I quitfor the second time, and I met Kleiner, and the rest we need to talk about.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It’s getting close to two. It’s okay with me if we start Kleiner Perkins.Perkins: Well, let’s start on it because who knows— I’ve got a doctor’s appointment atthree o’clock, so we can’t go too far.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How did you meet Eugene Kleiner?Perkins: I had been playing around with the idea of venture capital, and I realized that Ihad been a venture capitalist in the whole University Labs thing. I neverworked there, but I put up the money, and I managed it very successfully.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You put up the money, but not entirely, did you?Perkins: No, I put up all the initial money, and then we raised venture capital later.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Don’t I remember that Packard invested?Perkins: No, they didn’t invest in that. But John [A.] Young and some other managersfrom Hewlett-Packard [did]; some of the managers at Hewlett-Packard had aninvestment club. I raised money from three sources: the HP club, Sutter Hill[Ventures], and a small brokerage outfit called Davis, Skaggs. They are nolonger around, and they had a little venture pool.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you do this in the traditional way, or what became the traditional way?Going around and making presentations and all that formal stuff?Perkins: Yes, yes, but it was pretty easy. First of all, there was a buyer’s stampede.University Labs was very profitable, and I was very successful running theHewlett-Packard division. This was not too hard a decision to invest. So Iraised, I think, only $200,000, and I got a good valuation on University Labs,and that was it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: This is the mid-sixties?30Perkins: Mid-sixties, yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So there’s not much venture capital with a capital VC?Perkins: No, no, this is really early days. Let’s just talk about that. At that time, SutterHill— Draper, Gaither & Anderson had shut down by then; they were gone.So Sutter Hill existed, Bryan and Edwards existed, Pitch Johnson was around,but very small.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And only his own money?Perkins: And only his own money. And Davis & Rock. But I had met Arthur.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Mr. Perkins is looking at a list of early venture capital firms.Perkins: [commenting on list] I think Page Mill Associates is the Hewlett-Packardinvestment club. Davis & Rock, Draper and Johnson, Sutter Hill. Fireman’sFund is Reid Dennis. Bessemer is New York; Hambrecht and Quist, yes; DonLucas; Rock. This was before Mayfield; it was Davis & Rock. That’s beforeMayfield was set up. Anyway, yes, I know all these people.[puts list down]So I really only needed to go to three people, and I got them all. And it wasreally, I remember, very funny. At the Page Mill Associates, which was theHewlett-Packard investment thing, I was going to lunch with John Young. Wewere very good friends, we still are— He became president of HewlettPackard. And John says, “You know, our club heard about this hot laser deal;it’s backed by really big money from back East.” [laughter] And I said, “John,no. You’re looking at it!” And we laughed. And they all made a lot of money.So everybody was happy; everybody was happy. I remember John Atalla said,“Tom, are you going to make me rich?” And I said, “John, I’ll make you richin experience.” He said, “No, no, no, no.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I want the hard cash.Perkins: I want the money; I want the green.So when I said okay, I am going to become a venture capitalist, I had alreadybeen very successful at HP, and I had already made millions in sort-of venturecapital. And so I had a pretty good resumé. I had talked to a friend, anacquaintance, Peter [O.] Crisp, who managed the Rockefeller familyinvestment portfolio for high-risk stuff back in New York. I forget how I methim, but I met him. And I told him, “I’m flirting around with venture capital,and would you be interested?” And he said, “Yes, we would. I think I couldput probably a million dollars of the Rockefeller University endowment intoyour fund, if you set up a fund.” In those days that was a lot of money,because they managed the Rockefeller endowment. So this wasn’t written oranything, it was just we probably could do that. So I sort of had a million, butI figured I needed $5 or $6 million, and I would put in some of my ownmoney, but not all of it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now Kleiner hasn’t appeared yet?Perkins: No. So I go to— There was an investment banking outfit, Robertson, Colman,Siebel, and Weisel—they are gone too— But Sandy [Sanford R.]Robertson—I don’t want to sound immodest—but Sandy identified me as asuperstar when I was still running the HP thing. He had in mind hiring me todo something somehow that he could make some money on. So we were sortof friends, and I went to him and said, “I’ve decided I’m going to do venturecapital. Can you help me raise the money? I’ve already got a million from theRockefeller family.” He said, “Great, yes, I can help you, but you’ve got tomeet Eugene Kleiner. He’s just like you; he’s doing the exactly the samething. He wants me to help him also, and he has got some money from theHillman family, and you guys should just meet each other.” And, oh—okay.[deep sigh]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] If you say so.Perkins: Yes—whatever. And Kleiner, I subsequently learned, had exactly the samereaction—whatever. So we agreed to call each other. We agreed to meet atRickey’s down on El Camino in Palo Alto for breakfast. And we each thoughtit’d be a twenty-minute breakfast. So we meet; we couldn’t have been moredifferent in every—every way. Eugene was ten years older than myself. Hewas Viennese with a rich Viennese accent, sort of portly, very quiet, but verybright, very successful—and we were similar. He had been running alldepartments, except research, for Fairchild Semiconductor. He had started,then, a company in the education machine business, which wasn’t too great.But he sold it to Raytheon, and he made a bunch of money. He was a limitedpartner of Davis & Rock, but this was before they really had done a lot.Anyway, he was very impressive. So we talked all morning; we talkedthrough lunch; we went back to my house and kicked it around the rest of theday.We got together the next day, and we decided yes—yes. And so I wrote theoriginal business plan for Kleiner Perkins. We decided to call it KleinerPerkins instead of God knows what else, which I think was a very gooddecision, incidentally. We kicked around other names, like Pantechnic orsomething—I don’t know. Anyway, I remember saying to Eugene, “Look, ifwe’re not proud enough of it to put our names on, what are we doing? And hesaid, “You’re right.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It may not have harmed to have your names on it.Perkins: Well, who knows? We weren’t famous, but we were sort of getting there.Anyway, so he had $4 million committed from the Hillman family who he hadmet through—how did he meet them? I think through Davis & Rock, but I’mnot sure about that—yes, through Tommy Davis.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And that was family money?Perkins: Yes, the Hillmans are enormously wealthy and very, very low profile. Theyare multi-billionaires. Henry Hillman’s father— Henry is still alive; he’s in hishigh eighties now. His father was one of the original robber barons, you know,coal, barges, steel—Pittsburgh. And Henry inherited, I don’t know, $50million in 1940, or something like that, and he has just multiplied it forever.So the Rockefellers said, “Yes, whatever, that’s fine. You and Kleiner gettogether.” But I had to go back and meet Henry, because— You know. Wegot along very well at that meeting, and he said, “Okay, I want to take half ofyour fund. So you want to raise $10 million, I want $5 million.” And I said,“Gee Henry, that’s just wonderful, why do you want that?” And he said, “Soyou’ll return my phone calls.” [laughter] So we had Henry’s $4 million, my$1 million, so we had five. It was almost impossible for us to raise any moremoney. It was extremely difficult.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you have a figure in mind?Perkins: $10 million.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you just pull that figure out of the air?million. And we picked up a couple of insurance companies in Wisconsin, andhere and there. No significant money from New York. No real significantmoney from Silicon Valley or Northern California. We decided that it’s justgoing to take us too long to get to the $10 million. Let’s close with whatwe’ve got and get on with it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How long had it been?Perkins: Oh, it had been three months. I mean it was pretty fast, not very long. But, wesort of got the easy money immediately, and then, this is going to take—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And then it got difficult. Was the economy playing into this? The oil crisiswas coming the next year [1973].Perkins: Yes, there were various crises. The stock market was in one of its swoonsthen, but not as bad as it later got. But the short-term stock market alwaysinfluences the long-term decision. It shouldn’t, but it does. So we had thoseproblems. But at $8 million we had the largest fund in the world. The largestfund in the world, and everybody said it’s far too large, and you’ll neverinvest that much money. And they were right. We only invested $4 millionout of that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is that so?Perkins: We gave the rest of it back.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why don’t you tell me what those companies were.Perkins: Well, before I do that, let me tell you what was different about Kleiner &Perkins then. It was different at the time; it’s still in a way different; and weknew enough about it to know that it was different. I wish I could find thatoriginal business plan.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, don’t ever let anything happen to it.Perkins: I don’t know where it is, but it exists. But it was really very interesting. If youread it now, even after all these decades— We knew what we wanted to do,and we said we were going to do it, and we did it. We distinguished ourselvesright from the beginning by saying: We are not investors. We’re not WallStreet, stock-picker, investor people. We are entrepreneurs ourselves, and wewill work with entrepreneurs in an entrepreneurial way. We will be deeplyinvolved in what they are doing. We will be in it up to our elbows. This is adifferent kind of venture capital, and we will “Make It Happen.” I rememberone of the chapter heading in the business plan was “Making It Happen.”So we drew upon my experience at the University Labs, Eugene’s experiencein what he’d done—and we had done that, and really nobody else. I mean, youlook at Arthur Rock or Bill Draper, Don Lucas. They’d just put the money in,basically, and they’d maybe be on the board.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And Pitch Johnson too?Perkins: Well, Pitch has deserved pride in his ability to work with management. Healways talked about how he was a foreman in a steel mill and all that. ButPitch was operating on such a small scale in those days that he wasn’t a factor.But I would say Pitch was closer to us than anybody else. But Pitch had neverdone what Eugene and I had done. I mean, he was a foreman in a steel mill; hehad never started a venture. So we really had done it. So that was one keything.The second key thing, and I honestly think this is the key contribution thatTom Perkins has made to the American venture capital industry: I cleaned itup. Well, what do I mean? Before Kleiner & Perkins, we had all kinds ofinvestment partnerships. There was Fred [Frederick R.] Adler representingGeneral Electric money back in New York, and Reid Dennis, and all thesepeople.There were abuses. I won’t name names, but somebody would see a venture,and they would buy the stock in the venture at $1 a share, and then they’d puttheir fund into it at $10 a share and pocket the difference. I thought that wasjust unconscionable, you know? They would use the fund like a lighthouse toattract ventures, and then a really good one would come along, they’d pick itand the fund would never see it—another abuse. They had no auditedstatements. Most of these investment partnerships did not provide theirinvestors with audited statements. They would co-invest with their fund. Theywouldn’t do deal A or B, but C would come along, look pretty good, so they’dgo into it with their fund, maybe at the same price, who knows, maybe at abetter price. So they’d cherry pick among the deals. I thought all of that wasunconscionable.So we wrote what we called the Investor’s Bill of Rights, [chuckling] right inour first business plan. We pointed out what these abuses were, and that wejust simply wouldn’t do them. And we even took it one step further; that wewouldn’t invest in anything whatsoever that the fund might invest in. I meanwe might invest in real estate, because the fund wasn’t ever going to do realestate, but we would never do anything that the fund could have invested in.So that was a fairly big deal.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How was that received?Perkins: Well, obviously well received, obviously well received.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, but not by your peers who were misbehaving.Perkins: Well, who knows? But, once we did that, and once we were so successful,nobody could do it any differently. That was it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You’d set the standard.Perkins: We set the standard, and it’s still that way. Now our competitors did somethings that we refused to do. And that is that they would give the limitedpartners involvement in approval or disapproval of what would be invested in.We said, “Absolutely not. We will not do that, and we will not even exposeyou to the ventures. We won’t have an annual science fair where you comeback and get to see all the ventures and all that.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And that was happening?Perkins: Well, no, it wasn’t that. We were the first to do the reverse of that, which is toget our companies together to help themselves. But no investors involved. Justto work with each other, support each other, get to know each other, and all.We pioneered that. We are still way ahead on that. So it’s fairly simple; it’sfairly obvious.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: By being proscriptive about what shouldn’t happen, as well as what shouldhappen, aren’t you eliminating a number of potential co-investors?Perkins: No, but we’re eliminating a number of ways to get rich.You look at KKR [Kohlberg Kravis Roberts]. I only can stand in awe of whatthey have done. I mean, they put a fund together, they pay themselves a feefor putting the fund together; they make an investment, they pay themselves afee for making the investment; the investment makes some money, they takethe profit out, whether the rest of the fund is above water or not. To me thisis— In my book I said I was an investor in a cattle-feeding tax-shelter dealonce years ago, and I remember I called the general partner to find out howthings were going, and he said, “Tom, your cows died.” [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] Well, so much for that.Perkins: So in these big funds your cows can die, and they will all get rich. You seethis is the Wall Street syndrome. Now, Kleiner and I, we used to sit aroundand say boy, we are really stupid. I mean we are making whatever we’remaking, which was not bad. But, my God! You know we just wouldn’t havehad the gall to even think of doing what KKR did. I mean to this minute WallStreet just astonishes me in what they do—astonishes me.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: People in general just assume this is the way it’s done?Perkins: This is just the way it’s done, yes. Over the years we’ve never had any disputewith an investor, not once. There has not been a venture capital scandal ingeneral. You go on Google, and you say Wall Street scandal, and you’ll getabout two million hits. Do the same with venture capital, you’ll get maybe100,000. But it will all have to do with the pricing of stock options in theventures themselves, not with venture capital firms. So I think Kleiner and Ishould get some credit for what we did.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Does the industry give you that credit?Perkins: Oh, I think so. I don’t think they’ve thought about it. I think they’d give usplenty of credit for incubating and initiating ventures, which is probably whatwe’ll talk about the next time.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But of course this would all be water off a duck’s back if you hadn’t built asuccessful partnership. Otherwise, who cares what Kleiner and Perkins say?Perkins: Exactly, who cares?There is one interesting thing that goes into the future: we went from a 20-percent carried interest to a 30-percent carried interest.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How far along was it?Perkins: Oh, we’ve had that for years. The way that came about is: I had this idea ofchanging what we were doing and raising a great deal more money andbecoming more of a wholesaler of venture capital, working through otherventure capital partnerships that we knew around the country. I had proposedraising a billion dollars. I was going to use Morgan Stanley to do it, and it wasgoing to happen. To facilitate that I was going to drop our carry from 20percent to 10 percent, and good old Henry Hillman said—this is years ago—he said, “Tom, I will invest some money in that, but if you will only raise$100 million, I’ll take 50 percent of it, and I’ll pay you 30 percent. I foundthat very persuasive.So I called our other partners, the University of California, and so on. I willnever forget—I called the treasurer over at Berkeley for their endowment, andI said, “We’re putting this new fund together. “It’s going to be $100 millionand 30 percent.” “What? NO! Wow, ugh—that’s ridiculous, really terrible.” Isaid, “Okay, never mind.” He said, “Well, wait a minute, wait a minute. Youmean I’ve got to pay 30 percent to participate?” And I said, “Well, this is sortof being forced on us by Henry Hillman.” He said, “I just can’t believe it; Ican’t believe it. Okay.” [laughter] But they have all made more from us at 30percent than they have from anybody else at twenty.All right, I think we have to wind up now. I’ve got to get out of here. Is thiswhat you were looking for?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It definitely is.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: This is the second session with Mr. Perkins. It’s September 23, 2009. We gotKleiner Perkins founded last time. You also talked about raising the first fund.Perkins: Yes, I think we did talk about that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And it wasn’t easy.Perkins: It was very difficult, and we weren’t able to raise the full amount we wished.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So should we go straight to Tandem Computers?Perkins: Sure. We hired Jimmy Treybig and Jack Loustaunou from HP. Jimmy hadbeen manager of the peripherals divisions of HP, and Jack Loustaunou wasthe chief financial officer for the computer divisions of HP. They both wantedto join Kleiner Perkins as partners, and they did.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: As full partners?Perkins: No, we called them employee limited partners. Kleiner and I were the generalpartners with all the risk, but we gave them partnership participation asworking limited partners. It was a special category. So they had an incentive.We did various deals. In my book I talked about what we did—somesemiconductor things. We did a venture in printers, which was a Sutter Hillventure that Sutter Hill invited us to participate in. We did about seven oreight deals. If you exclude Tandem and Genentech and only look at thoseseven or eight deals in that first partnership, they were profitable, but justbarely profitable. I mean it wasn’t a catastrophe, but it was not something youwould ever write home about. As we got into it, we realized, Eugene and I,this is not working. We were not seeing opportunities. I don’t think anybodywas seeing opportunities, world-class, wonderful opportunities that you justreally felt excited about investing in. They just weren’t there. We were gettingbusiness plans, but they were banal, most of them. The sort of thing youwould read and just shrug your shoulders.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Does this just happen that there’s a cluster of nonentities?Perkins: No, Kleiner and I were too early for a big fund in Silicon Valley. The waterhadn’t come to a boil; there just wasn’t that much going on. There was a littlebit, and the little bit that was going on was enough to keep John Bryan andDraper and Rock and all those engaged—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Pitch Johnson.Perkins: —but not that busy. And so we were trying to accelerate everything, and thisis like pushing against a wall when there is no wall; you just sort of fall down.So Eugene and I were open towards and talking about, maybe we’ve got to dothis ourselves. We were talking to Jimmy Treybig and Jack Loustaunou aboutthat too, and basically Treybig said in his Texas accent, “Well, I’ve got anidea.” It was the fault-tolerant computer which he had been involved with atHewlett Packard, which I had been involved with to some extent. But truefault-tolerant computers really didn’t exist. I mean, there were computersystems that were designed to deal with failures, but they weren’t fullyautomatic and fully foolproof.So Jimmy had this idea of a new computer system, and he and I began to kickit around, just between us. I was reasonably expert in computer technologymyself, and I couldn’t see any problem with it, superficially at least, with thetheory of it. So we hired two experts; we hired a hardware expert by the nameof Jim [James A.] Katzman, who was at HP, and a software expert namedMike [Michael D.] Green to work full-time on this idea and see if thehardware and software could be worked out to make this thing feasible, and ofcourse they did. It was a breakthrough in computing; it was a packet-switchedmultiprocessor system that was years ahead of anything else, and it still exists.It’s still going right now at Hewlett Packard, and the technology was veryimportant.So we decided to put a company together around this idea. I wrote thebusiness plan with some help from Jimmy. Jimmy and I tried to raise moneyto finance it, and we couldn’t raise any money, at least initially. We went allover; we went back East. There’s a famous story: Jimmy was very much aTexas boy, and very uncomfortable in clothing, you know, dressed up.[laughter] I wanted to take him to New York to raise money. So one afternoonI took him up to San Francisco—we were down in Menlo Park—and we wentto Brooks Brothers. I bought him everything: shoes, socks, shirts, ties, jacket,pants, everything. The salesman probably thought he was my boyfriend orsomething. [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: He needed to be presentable.Perkins: Yes. This was before Frank [Caufield] joined the partnership, but I rememberhim talking about that later. He said, “Tom had Jimmy’s teeth capped and hisown fangs pulled to go back to Wall Street.” [laughter] The joke is we gotback there, and we were making our presentations, and Jimmy said, [imitatinga Texas accent] “Well, how do I look? Tom dressed me.” He just made a bigjoke of the whole thing. But in spite of his charm and everything, we did notraise the money.But the more I thought about it, the more sales presentations I made, the moreinfatuated I became with the idea myself. So I prevailed upon Kleiner tofinance the whole thing, so that we would do the first round of the company,100 percent out of the partnership, which was a big commitment of ourcapital. Now don’t ask me how much it was, but it was probably pretty closeto $1 million.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now, why does Kleiner finance it? I believe you had some money from thesale of your company.Perkins: No. Kleiner and I had started Kleiner & Perkins; we had put in our ownmoney. One of the things I maybe have mentioned, that bill of rights—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, you did.40Perkins: The idea is that we would invest as limited partners into Kleiner Perkins,which we did. So any investment that Kleiner Perkins made had our automaticparticipation. So I had to persuade Eugene for the partnership to financeTandem Computers. Which he did; he agreed. Sort of at the last minute, PitchJohnson, who we made a presentation to, decided he would participate in avery small way. But it was an endorsement of the idea.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Are all these people hesitating because they can’t really see how this computeris any better than any other system that’s out there?Perkins: Well, I think there were a number of reasons. First of all, it was a technicalthing, and they were not technologists. I don’t think they fully understood itthe way Jimmy and I did, and Eugene did. Two, there was alreadycompetition: IBM, Hewlett-Packard, and Digital Equipment were already inthe market. Three, the stock market was in one of its funks right about then,and nobody could imagine that two years in the future it would be any better,that sort of thing. And I think people just thought that it would be a mistake.I remember when we had raised our money Henry Hillman said, “What areyou going to invest in?” And I said, “Well, blah, blah, blah.” And I didn’tanswer the question. And he said, “Well I hope you won’t invest inminicomputers, because I think that has come and gone.” Well, this was, ofcourse, a minicomputer. But I hadn’t promised we wouldn’t; I just didn’t saythat we would.So there were a lot of negative ideas out there. When we started the company[Kleiner & Perkins], everybody on Sand Hill Road and at Hewlett-Packardthought we were going to fall flat on our face. Hewlett-Packard gave us notrouble, even though we had hired some people from Hewlett-Packard,because they just thought we were going to fail.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But also you mentioned that Treybig had the idea for the computer while hewas still at Hewlett-Packard.Perkins: He did, he did; he promoted it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But Hewlett-Packard didn’t feel—Perkins: No, no. He tried to— Well, I don’t how hard he pushed, but he did have theidea, but he was not running the whole computer operation. He was justrunning part of it, and he pushed the idea, and HP didn’t do anything with itand had no proprietary interest in it. We never had any trouble with HP onpatents or litigation or anything like that. Because of my connections to HP, Ididn’t want to pirate people from HP and irritate HP, and we never really did.We hired some people, but mostly not, although Tandem had the reputation ofbeing an HP spinout, but it really wasn’t. But that misperception was mostlybecause of Jimmy’s involvement and my involvement.So we developed the system, and it worked. We had a hell of a hard timeselling the first one. It was very, very difficult, and I think we sold, was itCitibank? I think it was Citibank thatwas our very first customer. I remembertalking to the executive that made the decision. I said, “Why did you buy it?”He said, “I figured there was a 70 percent chance you’d never deliveranything, but I wouldn’t risk any money. If you did deliver it, and it did whatyou said it would, it would be fantastic.” So, we did and it did. Then Tandemtook off very fast, and we got all kinds of further financing, and it turned outto be a huge success. So Treybig and Jack Loustaunou decided to work bothfull-time at Tandem. Instead of trying to hire a management team and theystay in the [Kleiner Perkins] partnership, they both left to join Tandem.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And that was fine with you?Perkins: It was fine with me, sure. It was fine with them; it worked out well. I didn’twork full-time at Tandem, but I worked probably 60 percent of my time atTandem, hiring people, recruiting, planning the financial side of it, and thenlater raising endless money, and so forth, plus, just deeply involved in thestrategy of the company.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now that is sort of the nameplate, or whatever the term would be, of KleinerPerkins in the eyes of the world.Perkins: That’s right, yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: From the get-go, you and Kleiner were going to be really hands on inmanaging companies?Perkins: Yes, we always said we would be hands on. But we didn’t think we wouldstart the companies. We thought we would just be deeply involved with theentrepreneur, which we were in everything. But Tandem, Genentech, andHybritech were three huge hits where we really started the companies. So wewent beyond what we said we would do in our original business plan. But thedeep involvement was there always, right from the beginning.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I interpret from that remark that after those three companies you did withdrawa little?Perkins: No, we continued to do it. But first of all, it became something that a lot ofpeople started to do, and it became something called ‘incubations’ and all ofthat. So it’s not that we stopped doing it, it’s more that others began to do it,and so the uniqueness of what we had pioneered began to wear off. But forthose three companies, we were way ahead of the field, way ahead.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now was it almost immediately obvious that Tandem was going to be asuccess? And were you then on a roll so that from then on it wasn’t as difficultto raise money?Perkins: Yes. Tandem never really faltered. It did what it said it would do when it saidit would do it, although the sales were a little slower to take off, and then tookoff more rapidly. But it basically hit its plan. And Tandem was never terriblydifficult to finance because it was much more understandable than Genentech,and it was a computer company. It had great margins, great customers, aworldwide market, proprietary software, proprietary hardware. It was, as theysay, a no-brainer once it was up and running and once we proved it wouldwork. So I have to congratulate Kleiner and myself for taking the initial riskon it, because if it hadn’t worked we would have lost an awful lot of moneyand looked pretty foolish. It would have destroyed that fund, and we wouldn’tbe talking about it now.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, exactly. Would Tom Perkins be a venture capitalist?Perkins: No. God knows what I’d be doing. I wouldn’t be a venture capitalist.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: In that interim period, when things weren’t going well, did you ever have athought in the deep of night that you had made a mistake?Perkins: No, I didn’t. In my book I made a joke of some of the things we did, but theyweren’t that stupid. And we did make a profit on the other things than thesethree companies that were so important. So I mean it wasn’t idiotic. But Idon’t think I ever had a doubt that Tandem Computers would succeed.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And you were pretty confident if Tandem succeeded that you would succeed?Perkins: Oh yes. I remember during the process that we were developing Tandem andbefore we had it working, just being very impatient because I knew it wasgoing to work, and I just wanted to get on with it. And I was right, it did work.Genentech is not quite that simple, but it’s similar. Should we go on to<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, I’d like to. When Treybig and Loustaunou left, of course they left emptyplaces, and I suppose that’s why [Robert A.] Swanson comes in as a juniorpartner.Perkins: That’s right. We needed to replace Treybig because he was the technical,marketing kind of guy, and so we hired Bob Swanson.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But why?Perkins: Well, Eugene knew Bob. Bob worked for Citigroup, I think.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, Citicorp Venture Capital.Perkins: I had never met Bob, but Citigroup had invested in the semiconductorcompany that we had invested in, whose name I can’t remember, which was acatastrophe. It was no good; we lost all our money very quickly, and it was amixture of incompetence and fraud on the part of the entrepreneurs. [laughter]Yes, it’s a bad mix. It wasn’t even a good Ponzi scheme.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [laughter] Well, you’ve got a good model now in Bernard Madoff.Perkins: Eugene was on the board of directors and so was Bob, so they met each other.We’d spun Jimmy out; we were looking for somebody else, and Eugene said,“I know this Bob Swanson who I’m very impressed with. Why don’t you meethim?” So I met him, I was impressed, and we hired him. We replaced JackLoustaunou with a lady named Gerry Myers who did the financial side of ourbusiness for years. We also moved from Menlo Park up to the EmbarcaderoCenter [in San Francisco]. We were in building number two, the secondbuilding built. This was before this building [building 4] was built. We had Perkins’s oral history in the Genentech series is online at http://bancroft.berkeley.edu/ROHO/projects/biosci/. Theoral histories with Herbert Boyer, Robert Swanson, and Arthur Riggs take a somewhat different perspective onaspects of Genentech’s early history.the penthouse; it was beautiful but very small, and that’s neither here northere.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why did you move?Perkins: Well, both Eugene and I loved San Francisco, and we just didn’t want to bepart of the herd. On Sand Hill Road, where we had been, more and moreventure capitalists were gathering, and they were going to lunch, and theywere having entrepreneurs, and everybody knew what everybody was doing.There’s a herd mentality in investing that’s very pernicious and pervasive andcan influence your thinking. It’s just like you really don’t want to know whatthe stock market is doing when you’re making an investment. It doesn’tmatter because you are going to be years in the thing before you ever get outof it anyway. But that short-term herd mentality was annoying to Eugene andmyself, and we thought let’s just get out of here since we both love the Cityanyway. So we did. We were in that office for, oh gosh, I want to say aboutthree years, and then we moved into a bigger office in building number three,next door, for several more years. Finally we had hired so many people thatwere commuting up from the Peninsula that we moved back down, first toPalo Alto and then back to Menlo Park. So that’s where we still are. That’s thewhole cycle.But anyway, Bob Swanson lived in the City and coincidentally, purelycoincidentally, was the roommate of Brook Byers, who worked for PitchJohnson, so they knew each other. I didn’t know that when we hired Bob. Andthen they both married and were no longer bachelors. Anyway, so Bobworked on various Kleiner Perkins deals that we had, one of which was acompany called Cetus, which subsequently became very famous, in the EastBay, founded by two medical doctors, Dr. [Ronald E.] Cape [interviewer note:] and Dr. [Peter J.] Farley. They wereinteresting. They were very promotional, good salesmen, and their businessplan was to automate biological laboratory instrumentation, cell counters, andsuch things. They made a good presentation, and we invested along with abunch of other investors at a fairly high valuation, as I recall. I want to say itwas like $30 million, which I think was the total valuation of the company,which in those days was an awful lot of money. But we invested anyway, andboth Eugene and I were the least comfortable with Cetus of any of the otherthings we were doing because the valuation was so high that it had to be very,very successful for us to make any money.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You were also entering a new field. See Cape’s oral history in the Bancroft Library series.Perkins: Yes and no. It was biotech but from the laboratory side.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Not making drugs.Perkins: Absolutely, no pharmaceuticals, no recombinant DNA, nothing like that. Itwas an instrument company whose focus was in biotechnology, and they werenot getting anywhere. They just were very slow and making almost noprogress, and Eugene and I were very frustrated with them. So I asked BobSwanson to work more or less full-time trying to help Cetus accomplishsomething. So he spent a fair amount time over there, and he did not like thedoctors Cape and Farley, and they didn’t like him.One of the things Swanson did on his own initiative was to set up a luncheon,a brain-storming lunch, with the Nobel Prize winner Donald [A.] Glaser. Hegot the Nobel Prize in physics, but he was working in biology at the time, sohe changed fields. He was a small investor in Cetus, personally somehow. I’veforgotten how that came about, but anyway, he had a small stake in Cetus. Sohe agreed to a lunch with Cape and Farley and Swanson, and at the last minuteSwanson invited me to attend. So we went over to Berkeley somewhere andhad a fairly long lunch. I had never met Glaser before, and he was, of course,a genius, and he was just a fountain of ideas, just this, this, this, this, this. Andno matter what he said, it was like water off a duck’s back—Cape and Farleycould care less; they paid no attention.One of the things that Glaser touched upon was the then possibility that youcould open up a gene and insert something new into it and close it again. Andif you could do that, and if you could have that gene express, you could makea new substance. That idea went over my head at about forty miles an hour,and it didn’t register.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, you don’t come out of biology, no wonder.Perkins: No. And neither did Cape and Farley [register]. But Swanson really got that. Iremember the next day he took me aside and he said, “This idea is absolutelyfantastic; it is revolutionary; it will change the world; it’s the most importantthing I have ever heard.” And I said, “Yes, now that you put it that way,you’re right. Let’s get Cetus to do that.” And Swanson said, “Yes,absolutely.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That’s kind of amazing. Swanson has an undergraduate degree in chemistry.He had no particular background in biology.Perkins: Right, yes. But he was a very smart guy. [chuckling] So he went back over toCetus for the next several weeks trying to persuade them to do something withthis, and they said, “Well, you know, we don’t have the manpower,”whatever, whatever. I remember calling Cape and Farley and saying, “Look,we’ll loan you Swanson and let him set up the division of your company.We’ll put in money and whatever—let’s do this! It sounds really exciting.”“No, no, no, no.” So that was that, and I said, well, I guess that’s that.Swanson, of course, didn’t give up on the idea. I mean this is all very famous,and you know all of this. But he pursued, he read up on it [recombinant DNAtechnology], and then he discovered the two pioneers, or two leading experts,Stanley [N.] Cohen and Herbert W. Boyer, Cohen at Stanford and Boyer atUniversity of California. Between the two of them they had the basic patentson what are called restriction enzymes, which will open and another one that So you can open and then find a match, seal it atthe end of that, close it back again, and have a closed loop of DNA called aplasmid. Well, they had the patents on the enzymes. What I have justdescribed had never been done.So,Swanson met Boyer, and he pestered Boyer on the phone until finallyBoyer agreed to a meeting. They had the meeting, and it was going to be fiveminutes on a Friday afternoon, and that’s as far as Boyer was concerned. Itwas a famous meeting; it went on for hours over beer and everything. Boyer’sattitude was it’s all great, and yes, it might work, and it could be veryimportant. But it’s, you know, ten years. Swanson kept saying “Why does ittake so long?” And Boyer said, “Well you know, you’ve got to write theresearch grants, and you’ve got to get the funding.” And Swanson said, “Wellwhat if you had the money? What if you didn’t have to write any researchgrant, you just have the money?” “Well, then I guess I could buy theequipment.” And after two or three days Boyer had come around to the pointof view, yes, it could be done. And it could be done right away.So Swanson and Boyer put together a business plan—and I think they evenhad the name Genentech—to fund what was Genentech, and they brought it tome. Of course, Swanson just brought it to the office, basically, to be financed.And as I recall they wanted $2 million or $2.5 million, which in those dayswas an awful lot of money, to do Genentech. And they were going to rentspace, hire people, buy equipment, and then see. Well, and you also had tonegotiate rights from the University of California and Stanford to use thetechnology. The three Cohen-Boyer patents cover the recombinant DNA procedure and products.So it was a complex mix of things that had to happen. And then try thisexperiment, see if you could make— First of all you had to make a gene.There was no way in those days to extract a gene from nature, so you had toput it together amino acid [nucleotide] block by amino acid [nucleotide] blockusing analytical chemistry. There were only two organizations in the countrythat could do that; one was MIT and the other was the City of Hope Medical[Center] in Duarte, California. So they were going to try to get space, hirepeople, do this, and then see if it worked.Swanson brought in Boyer; I met him; we went through all this, and of courseI didn’t understand the technology. But I asked Boyer what equipment, whattests, how will you know if you have succeeded, what’s the size, how muchdoes the equipment cost, stuff like that. He had answers to all of that; he’dthought it all through. Although I didn’t know really in depth what they weretalking about, I did understand that they had a pretty coherent plan. So thenthey went away and came back with a proposal to do Genentech, so that goesin chronologically before what I have just said about the $2.5 million.I talked to Eugene, and we both came to the conclusion that this is so close topure research that it’s not appropriate for venture capital. I sat down with Boband I said, “You know, I think it probably might work, but Kleiner and I, andwhoever else invests in this thing, will end up owning so much of this in orderto justify taking that kind of risk that you and Boyer won’t have much ofanything. Why don’t you do it differently? Why don’t you figure out someway to subcontract these different pieces of this experiment and prove that itworks, file for patents, and all that? And then we’ll put in more money.” AndBob said, “Well, the trouble is that we have to make this gene step by step,and what we want to make is insulin, and it’s going to take a lot of money tomake that gene.” And I said, “What about some other gene, some shorter,simpler gene, something that will prove the principle, but won’t take so muchmoney?” So, he basically went away for three or four days, and I think hetried to raise money from others; I’m not sure about that, but he came back.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: He did go to other people.Perkins: Yes, okay, and he got turned down.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes.Perkins: Yes, and I don’t know who they were, but I knew he—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Charles Crocker was one of them.Perkins: Nobody would have done what he wanted. So he came back, and he basicallysaid, “Okay, I’ve talked to Boyer. The gene we’ll pick is for a thing calledsomatostatin; it’s a human hormone.” (We still don’t know why we make it[in our bodies], but we make something called somatostatin.) “It’s a very shortgene. It would be the proof of principle, and I can hire the City of Hope, or Ithink I can, and we can hire Cal [University of California] and et cetera, etcetera.” And I said, “Okay!” I checked with Kleiner, so we committed$150,000, which sounds like nothing, which was nothing, to start Genentech.So Bob had our check, which was enough to get the somatostatin gene made.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You said, this is a risky thing—all we’re going to do is put $100,000 in it?Perkins: No. I think I put in $150,000, I’m not sure. Or was it $100,000?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: No, you put $100,000 in.Perkins: I can’t remember. We ended up with a quarter of a million in it. But I thoughtthat they would fall short and that I wanted— Look, I wanted to put in moremoney than the $100,000 because I wanted to own more of Genentech than athird. [chuckling] Swanson didn’t want us to own more than that for obviousreasons, for stock dilution. So we were both right. It did take more moneythan $100,000. I think it took another $150,000 by the time we had gottenthrough that first phase, another $150,000. I remember, I think the total was$250,000 that Kleiner Perkins had in it, and we did own, we wound up withabout a third of the company, with Swanson and Boyer having the other twothirds.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You’re going at it, to my mind, in a financier’s way. If I were doingsomething like that I would be thinking, how much is it going to cost to testthe technology? How much is it going to take to do that proof of principleexperiment?Perkins: That is what we did.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is it?Perkins: Oh sure, because instead of renting a building, hiring the people, buying theequipment, and then finding out, we flipped all of that out of the way, andproved the principle.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, I guess, but you were describing it in terms of what percentage of thecompany would be owned.Perkins: Well, sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It’s all in there?Perkins: It’s all in there. It’s not either or. So Bob and I were both right. I did get toinvest more money and did get to own more of the company.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now why would you want to own more of the company? It was very risky.Perkins: [chuckling] No, it isn’t. If the experiment works, this is the greatestinvestment in the history of the world! You want to own as much of it as youpossibly can while it’s cheap.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, but a lot of people would look at it in the exact opposite manner. If I’mgoing to get in this at all, it’s going to be with a very small stake because Idon’t think this is certain.Perkins: Well, but it was a small stake. It worked for all concerned. It worked for mebecause we ended up owning a lot of Genentech, and it worked for Bob andHerb for the same reasons. The experiment, of course, was successful. We diddo insulin. We filed for patents in every direction. And then, well, I’mjumping ahead, but from then on Genentech did nothing but raise money. Iwas chairman of the board and the financier behind Genentech. I’ve forgottenhow many rounds we had. I raised pretty close to $3 billion for Genentechover the years. The public issue, then these research partnerships, industrialinvestors, public issue, on and on. It was fun and exciting.So we ended up with a really astonishing partnership, I think, with Swansonof course running Genentech; Boyer on the board but detached andscientifically involved but not in any way from the business [standpoint]; andmy responsibility of raising the money, always making sure Genentech didn’trun out of money. And it just worked perfectly for years and years. There wasalways some rivalry between Bob and myself but not really that serious.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Meaning in terms of who was really going to take control of the company?50Perkins: Well, no—yes and no. You know, I’m the proverbial 800-pound gorilla.[laughter] We had a three-man board of directors: Boyer, Swanson, andPerkins.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Exactly. And was that deliberate?Perkins: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that usually your way of operating, to work on such small boards?Perkins: The smaller the board the better, always.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: For the obvious reasons.Perkins: For the obvious reasons. And so for a long time, the whole board ofGenentech was just the three of us. And we met frequently, and I was deeplyinvolved in the business strategy of Genentech and sort of the researchstrategy; I wouldn’t say the scientific strategy, but the researchstrategy—which products and so on we should do. And I think Bob— Well, itworked. We never really quarreled. I never tried to run Genentech. I couldhave very well, easily, have run Tandem Computers, and Jimmy Treybigknew that. So I never had to quite do it, because he knew I could do it. It wasdifferent with Genentech. I couldn’t have run Genentech. I didn’t have thefeeling for the technology that Bob had.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Which is kind of amazing in itself, considering where he came from.Perkins: Yes, but he spent full-time learning this technology from the ground up.Remember, when Genentech was started it was all new.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, it was.Perkins: So he became a total expert in the whole science of it, which I never did. Icould talk for an hour about how it works, and I would convince you, but Istill wouldn’t know what I’m talking about. [<|endoftext|>
Interviewer laughs] But he really didknow; he really did know. But very clearly, he was happy to let me do thefinancial side of it, which I did. So it was a good partnership. The only timewe really disagreed was on taking the company public. I felt that we should doit, the timing was right, and that we could get an astonishing valuation onGenentech.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Timing now in terms of the stock—Perkins: In the market, the stock market. It was one of those windows, you know? Andwhen it’s open you should go through it. And Bob didn’t want to do it becausewe didn’t need the money, for one, and two, he knew how much more workthere was going to be for himself.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But is that really true that you didn’t need the money?Perkins: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because at that point you had various contracts with pharmaceuticalcompanies but—Perkins: Well, we were venture capital; I’ve forgotten who all was in it, but Genentechwas a hot property. Once that experiment worked, the valuation on Genentechskyrocketed. And even though Kleiner & Perkins invested some more money,it was smaller and smaller amounts at ever higher prices.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see, yes.Perkins: Yes, so it wasn’t a shortage of money. I just felt that the public would put sucha high valuation on Genentech that we should do it, and that once thatvaluation was achieved it would stick. I was correct about that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What changed Bob’s mind?Perkins: Well, okay. So we debated this for about three weeks, and it was just classic. Iwas very strong in favor of it, Bob was very strong against it, and Boyer wasthe swing vote, and he wouldn’t vote. He said, “I will vote with the majorityof my friends.” [laughter] So, it was brilliant, absolutely brilliant.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And it’s so revealing of character, too.Perkins: In other words—yes, you work this out guys. And what tipped it was I foundout that Cetus was talking to investment bankers and was going to go publicand would be the first biotechnology company. Now Bob and I both by thistime hated Cetus. You know, we would make money when they went public,but we hated Cetus. And I sat down with Bob and I said, “Bob, are you reallyprepared to let Cetus get the limelight?”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Going public. [chuckling] And that did it? That was it?Perkins: And he thought about it, and he said, “You’re right, let’s go.” And then, it was100 percent, 100 percent. And of course we just rocked the world! It was thehottest IPO in history up until that time.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I know that. But I have read articles saying that not everybody was happy withthe fact that the share price flew up to such extraordinary levels.Perkins: Well, I don’t know who was not happy with it. [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I mean outside the company. [laughter] I’m not sure what was meanteither, but the only thing I can speculate is that it put huge pressure onanybody who came afterwards to do something similar. And of course Cetusdid in a way.Perkins: Well, isn’t that a pity. Well, Cetus did in a way, but as you know, Cetus wasfundamentally a failure. They did discover CPA, which is poly—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: No, PCR.Perkins: PCR, polymerase chain reaction. Kary [B.] Mullis discovered that and wonthe Nobel Prize for doing that, which enabled Cetus to emerge successfully.But I’ve always said, eventually every pig finds its truffle, because Cetus wasnot really a success.But anyway, I was very keen on taking Genentech public because Ithought—I was right—we would dominate the field, we’d suck all theoxygen, and we would be able to use our new celebrity status to hire the bestpeople in the world to help us grow. All of which we did. And we could useour public price to set the stages for subsequent rounds of financing, which wedid do and which we had to have, in Japan and Europe and all kinds of places.And these research [and development clinical] partnerships, which Fred [A.]Middleton and I invented, and that’s another story.But the only downside was that— Well, it wasn’t really a downside. All theemployees at Genentech had gotten stock options at fractions of the offeringprice of the company. They were restricted stock which then had to convertinto common stock.Let me just step back a moment into the philosophy that Kleiner & Perkinshad, Kleiner and I. It was that we wouldn’t get rich unless we did it on theshoulders of the entrepreneurs that we financed and the employees of thecompanies we financed. That sounds like a platitude and something that’s agood thing to say, but we really did believe it. And I think we had thereputation for being too generous, and being always sure that everybody didwell, which is a great reputation if you want to make sure you see everything.It’s just like when I was collecting art or automobiles or something. Iencouraged people to think that I paid too much, because then I would seeeverything. If I saw a piece or a car or something, and if I didn’t want it,instead of saying, “Well, I’ll give you 80 percent of what you’re asking,” I’djust say no or yes and not haggle. We consciously did that in the beginning,and we did see everything, because the entrepreneurs want the minimumdilution, and why not go to the people that will pay the top dollar, which wasus. So it was a consciously cultivated strategy. That was one.And then two: we wanted to make sure that the employees of the ventures hada lot of participation in the venture. To pull a number out of the air, 20 percentwould be sort of the rule of thumb. Even though the primary entrepreneurhimself or herself—usually himself—thought, here are these people, I don’thave to give them that much, we forced participation up to about that level inall of these ventures.We had done that with Genentech. So all of the employees at Genentech,virtually 100 percent of them, right down to the janitors, had cheap stock inGenentech, and they all made a lot of money on that public issue. So the onlyproblem with taking Genentech public was that we raised the price frompennies, to, I don’t know, let’s say $50 a share for new stock options. For awhile that was okay; we were still able to hire people. But then the flood ofother biotech companies started to emerge, and our small competitorseverywhere were able to attract very important scientists and technologistsusing cheap stock because they had not yet gone public.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, I see.Perkins: So we were at a competitive disadvantage at Genentech because of our ownsuccess. This is one my great inventions; I have three great inventions: thelaser, junior common stock, and off-balance sheet financing. [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Okay.Perkins: Anyway, so the second great invention was junior common stock. I went toBob. (We had not been able to hire somebody because he went to work forone of these small competitors for cheap stock.) I said, “We’ve got to get backto the way we were when we were offering cheap stock.” So we hired lawyersand invented this idea of a junior level of stock. And why was it junior? Well,it could never be common stock unless various things happened. First of all, inthe event of a merger it would just be wiped out. Unless certain financial goalswere achieved, it would never convert to common stock. We set the financialgoals far enough in the future so there was some risk. And junior stock didn’thave voting rights. We piled stuff onto this junior common stock so that wecould price it at one tenth of the public market price. And we got thisapproved by the SEC. It was one of my great inventions.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that a fight with the SEC?Perkins: No, not in the beginning. Not in the beginning. We had good lawyers andgood analysis and good everything, and the SEC said okay. And so we startedto use junior common stock to attract— So we immediately became verycompetitive again. So we had everything: we were a public company, and yetwe were able to offer start-up options to the employees. Now, here is case ofthe chief financier figuring out ways to give the company away at bargainbasement price in order to grow it. So I mean I have to give myself somecredit; it’s exactly the opposite of what Wall Street would have done. If theycould have figured out a way to get ten times the public price they wouldhave.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How did you get that idea?Perkins: Necessity is the mother of all invention. [laughter] It was totally unique, and itworked just fine. What finally happened, and I think we did about threerounds of this—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Which would have taken you how far in time?Perkins: Several years in the future. But I’m so bad on dates and stuff like that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Into the eighties—not past the eighties, though?Perkins: Into the eighties, I think.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh it would have had to have been into the eighties.Perkins: It was definitely into the eighties.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But not into the nineties.Perkins: Not into the nineties. What finally happened was that you can’t keep ideas likethis secret. We didn’t have any patent or copyright on this idea, so othercompanies thought, this is a great idea! And they copied it, but they didn’t doit as rigorously as we did, and they basically weren’t putting any meaningfulrestrictions on the stock. They were just kind of pricing stuff cheap. And theSEC prohibited the whole idea, totally, except for the ones we had already putin place.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because they couldn’t take that away?Perkins: Well, we had done it right, and I don’t think that they wanted to take it away.But they just said, “Look, no more.” But [junior stock] worked, and it workedvery, very well for a long time, and that was great. That was one of the secretsof Genentech’s success.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What also interests me is the mindset of the scientists who are becoming alertto this new industry.Perkins: Yes, it didn’t take the scientists very long to figure out they could all becomemulti-millionaires.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: When you talk to those early Genentech scientists, like [David V.] Goeddeland [Dennis G.] Kleid, they weren’t coming to Genentech for the money; theywere coming to do the science. This was pre-public Genentech.Perkins: Well, yes and no. Don’t believe everything they tell you. They were notoblivious to the fact that they might make millions.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] You think? In the beginning?Perkins: Yes, of course they were not oblivious! Any more than Herb Boyer. Look—why does Herb Boyer not have the Nobel Prize?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I’ve heard about ten million reasons. But anyway, what’s yours?Perkins: It’s because he is probably a billionaire because of Genentech. That’s thereason, and I think the only reason.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I’m sure the fact that he had gone commercial, to use that awful term, did nothelp him with the Nobel committee.Perkins: Yes, right. Of course not. Or any of the others. But it just made total sense.Okay, since we’re still on Genentech, let me just touch on my third greatinvention, which was the limited partnerships for R&D financing. Are youaware of those?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I am. [interruption to change tape][End Audio File 3]Perkins: We proved the technology. Genentech is a big deal: we proved that man couldmake a new form of life, that that new form of life would make something ofno use to itself whatsoever, in fact, might even be negative to its ownexistence but would be something we wanted. Now that is a breakthrough, andthat’s why Cohen and Boyer should get the Nobel Prize. It’s absolutelyfundamental. And we all understood that at the beginning. It didn’t take yearsto figure that out. When we first talked about it, we understood if we can dothis, it’s like the light bulb. I mean it’s a big deal.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Had you finished your previous thought?Perkins: No, I was just going to talk about this third form of financing, the researchlimited partnerships, R&D partnerships. Okay, so I had in mind thatGenentech wanted to go public, and as a public company would be reportingearnings per share to shareholders. We were in the awkward situation ofhaving no revenue—zero—and only expense. So our P&L [profit and loss]statement would be a catastrophe. You start with zero sales, huge expenses,and a big loss. I thought sooner or later this is going to limit our growth andmake it very difficult for us to be a public company and a successful publiccompany. And this is long before Ken Lay and Skilling invented the offbalance sheet thing. It was invented by Fred Middleton, CFO at Genentech,and myself. I take 90 percent credit; he takes ninety percent credit. You willhave to decide.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] Do you fight about it?Perkins: No, it doesn’t matter. But it was an absolute breakthrough because weconverted our P&L statement from zero sales and then expenses to big sales,no expenses, and profit just like that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It’s pretty neat.Perkins: It’s a neat trick if you can do it. And we did it, and we did it several times.Again, we went to the SEC—and this is the difference between Ken Lay andSkilling. We went to the SEC, explained it all, got them to bless it, andpermitted us to sell it to investors, which we did. We financed a lot of thegrowth of Genentech with these. I think we did three of these partnerships. Iwas a great believer in it; I invested personally in these partnerships, and theywere very successful. Was there a conflict of interest? Of course, but we did itanyway. And, so I say that was a pretty important invention for me. It gotcopied by our competitors, again it got abused, and again the SEC prohibitedit, but afterwards.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So people are watching Genentech, aren’t they?Perkins: Oh they watch Genentech; they watch Tom Perkins.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I want to quote Tom Perkins, and this comes from Valley Boy. Yousaid, “Genentech was one of the most successful companies ever created, andby any measure the highlight of my venture capital career.” And that’s whatyou’ve been saying all along in different words. But what do you think ofwhen you say “the greatest thing in my career”? Are you thinking of themoney made, or?Perkins: Well, it’s all of the above. First of all, just to be sanctimonious: we save livesat Genentech, right? So we save lives; we also make a lot of money.[chuckling] We have enabled not just the creation of a company but thecreation of an entire industry. The whole biotech industry spun out ofGenentech in one way or another, and Hybritech, I would say. It was exciting.We never stumbled, you know, et cetera, et cetera. It just was a fantasticventure. I came close with Tandem Computers. Google is great and all of that. p. 117.But I don’t think there will ever be another Genentech—of that incrediblemixture of science and money-making. [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, that’s a pretty nice way to end on Genentech.Perkins: Okay.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you want to say something about Hybritech?Perkins: Yes, sure. Hybritech came along rather quickly after Genentech. Brook [H.]Byers, who we’d hired to replace Bob Swanson, had a great interest inbiotechnology. And so did we by this time; it was obvious to us that this wasgoing to be a big deal. Brook was approached by a medical doctor researchernamed Ivor Royston at the University of California, San Diego who had read apaper presented at—I can’t remember if it was Oxford or Cambridge—on athing called monoclonal antibodies, which is a single-cell source of ultrapure— Because [the monoclonal antibody] comes from a single source, it’sultra pure, is the essence of it. And that was given away in this paper; [theinventors] hadn’t filed for any patent protection. It was very, very foolish ofeither Oxford or Cambridge, whichever one it was, very, very foolish. Itwould not have happened in America at that time.Anyway, Royston had read this paper, understood immediately theimplications of it, and proposed a business based on the science to Brook.Brook went down to San Diego, met him, and was persuaded that it was agood idea, and persuaded me to put up the money. Pitch Johnson had neverforgiven me for not letting him into Genentech. So I let him into Hybritech.And I thought at the time, great! Here we go again; we have done Tandem,Genentech, we’re going to do Hybritech. Brook will spin out and runHybritech and keep the machine going. Brook wasn’t quite sure that hewanted to spin out. And, so we said, “Okay, well, you be chairman of theboard, and then if you want to be CEO, there’s nothing to it. And I’ll go on theboard.” Which I did, and we raised the money, and so forth. Now, you know,I’m the 800-pound gorilla, so, yes, Brook was chairman of the board, but Iwas on the board. [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And he probably knew that.Perkins: And I think Brook knew that, but I had a full expectation that Brook wouldleave the partnership and run Hybritech, and I think he did too in thebeginning. But for whatever reason he decided he’d rather be a venturecapitalist.We were also approached by Ted [Howard E.] Greene, who wanted to do theexact same thing. He had an idea for a company that would be a competitor toHybritech. He didn’t know about Hybritech, and he brought his idea to us, andwe said, “Hey, don’t do that, just run Hybritech,” which he did. And it was avery big success, Hybritech. I don’t want to spend a lot of time on it, but itwas a big success. We sold it to [Eli] Lilly and eventually we made $1 billionon Hybritech.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, a pretty good string of successes.Perkins: Not bad.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, and sort of despite yourself, there you are in the biomedical field.Perkins: Yes. Now I never really did much further with it. Brook went on in many,many other fields. But I think the partnership can take credit for creating thebiotech industry.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And was Kleiner behind all this?Perkins: Kleiner, by this time, was an interested observer, but not involved.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because he was emeritus, or?Perkins: No, he, he— Eugene was a dear, dear, dear friend, but I don’t want— I’m notdenigrating Eugene, but he would be very happy to take a nap after lunch andlet Tom do it all, you know? And there was just more and more of— That’ssort of what happened.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, he was ten years older than you.Perkins: He just withdrew into his own— Eugene was a great investor, a great partner,and a wonderful friend. However, he was extremely non-confrontational, andhe never really— You had to draw him out to find out what he was reallythinking. For example, he was on the board of Tandem Computers for years.He would go to board meetings and never say a word, not a word. If I’d askhim during a board meeting, he would not really say much. And onlyafterwards I would say, “Gene what did you think about—?” And then out itwould come, and it would be terrific, really good stuff. So I had to alwaysremind myself to pick Gene’s brains, keep him involved, get his participation,60because it wasn’t immediately forthcoming. He was very shy. I never sawEugene lose his temper—ever—on anything.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you were the pusher?Perkins: Yes, and the emotional [one]; I lost my temper all the time or seemed to.[<|endoftext|>
Interviewer chuckles] It wasn’t always real; it wasn’t always real.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It was a good show. I don’t have any trouble believing any of this. [laughter]All right, may I ask some probably to you very boring questions on venturecapital strategy?Perkins: Go ahead. Sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Okay, let’s get down to the real basics. When you are looking at a potentialinvestment, what is first and foremost in your mind? What primarily are youlooking for?Perkins: Let me give you a glib answer first. The glib answer is: if people say how doyou write a business plan? My answer is, “I can’t tell you; I can only tell youhow we read one.” Which is, we start at the back, and if the numbers are big,we look at the front to see what kind of business it is. [laughter] So, I’manswering your question by saying opportunity is the thing you lookfor—scale. In other words, there is a big difference between just a good ideaand a good idea that will make you a huge amount of money. So to make ahuge amount of money, it has to have certain ingredients. Brook will say thethree secrets are market, market, and market, or customer, customer,customer. You’ve got to have a big market for whatever this thing is so that itcan be scaled up and make it worth your while to bother with it, because thereis no such thing as low risk; there is no such thing as a low-risk deal, in myopinion. I mean, just look at the people that bought these mortgages.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, yes.Perkins: You know, there is always risk, and you may not know what it is, but it’salways there. And you’re kidding yourself if you say, “Well, I may not makeso much money on this, but it’s a low-risk investment.” Baloney. You willlose your money, and it’ll be a high-risk investment; you just didn’t knowwhat it was—that’s philosophical. So you look for a big market and, at least inmy case, risk associated with it. Now why do I say that? And the answer isbecause if it’s a risk-free investment, everybody will do it. You might be first,but you’ll have herds of competitors. You will never get the market share; youwill never achieve the scale that you need to achieve.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: This is Perkins’ Law.Perkins: Yes. Now the risk doesn’t have to be technical. It can be anything; it can bepeople risk, patent risk, market risk, production risk, science risk, but therehas got to be some doubt, risk to it, or everybody would do it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, that’s interesting.Perkins: And it’s so obvious, but it’s fundamental. So then that leads to how do you doit? Well, you put in the least amount of money to get rid of whatever youthink the risk is. Genentech was: would God let you do this? That was therisk, and we got rid of that risk for $250,000 or less. Okay, TandemComputers it was: can you actually make a computer system wheremultiprocessors simultaneously ask for the network? That’s a very severetechnical risk. If you can solve that problem, you got it. Hybritech—what wasthe risk? I would say the Hybritech risk was more people. But anyway, youhave just got to be sure, or try to be sure, that the initial investment reducesthe risk, and then pile in the money afterwards, and you will be verysuccessful. Now does everything that Kleiner Perkins has done meet thatformula? No. Segway: a perfect example of an investment that violates mybasic principles.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That you agreed to invest in?Perkins: No, I would have never. No, I didn’t agree to it. I wasn’t on the scene. I wouldhave never agreed to that, never.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What went wrong there?Perkins: Well, the risk is obviously market risk. You’ve got to build the damn thing,try to sell it to the post office, and find out, oh, they don’t want it. I mean youare in millions— So this means there are plenty of investment opportunitiesthat you just don’t do; you walk away from them. If you can’t structure it insuch a way as to get rid of the risk, don’t do the deal. And that’s why Kleinerand I turned down Apple Computer. [<|endoftext|>
Interviewer laughs] Which is stupid to admitto, but there was no technical risk in that. The risk was 100 percent marketing.I didn’t realize what a genius Steve Jobs was at marketing. And we turned itdown without meeting Steve Jobs, which was really, really stupid. But youcan’t win ‘em all. Can’t win ‘em all. We can’t win ‘em all.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Where are people coming into your strategy?Perkins: Okay, I hope this will be useful, because what you’re going to hear is differentthan I think most of the other venture capitalists you have talked to will tellyou. There is always the question: what’s more important, the person or theidea? I think it’s the idea. Most venture capitalists will say it’s theentrepreneur or the person. I say it’s the idea, for a couple of reasons. First ofall, bad people don’t have good ideas, you know? [chuckling] So you kind ofget a good person with a good idea. But the most important thing is theopportunity that the idea brings to you. So many times we have backed, Iwouldn’t say second-rate, rather we have backed high-risk individuals becausethey had a good idea, and we have not tried to replace that individual withsomebody better and keep the idea. And we have many, many times backed aventure that did not have a complete team. Now back when Kleiner and Istarted, most venture capitalists wanted a full business plan and the wholeteam.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: In place?Perkins: In place, and then they’ll maybe write the check. Eugene and I, and ever after,have not done that. First of all, it’s better if you meet the entrepreneur beforehe has written the business plan, and then you help write the business plan,like I did with Tandem Computers and Genentech. You maybe don’t send thebusiness plan to all of your competitors. [laughter] Not because of the price ofstamps. So that’s one. So you lock the entrepreneur into your own way ofdoing things by helping him [write], or indeed writing, the business plan.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And most entrepreneurs are quite happy to have you take over that way?Perkins: We’re talking about complex things here. The answer is yes, if they really getit, because at the end of the day we will make them very, very rich if they playit our way. And we have done it endless times.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, you’ve got your record.Perkins: So we have our record. And we make them rich by— We want to be thecontrol and dominant investor in the deal. So if the entrepreneur starts off bypercent of this venture because I don’t want you guys running it,” we educatethem very quickly. We educate them immediately that even if we are 1, or 2,or 3 percent of this venture—if we are the lead investor, and you don’t dowhat we want you to do—when the next round of financing comes up and ifwe don’t participate, you’ve had it. So we control this venture, whether youknow it or not, as soon as you take our check. And this is a blinding revelationto some of them! And in some cases they say, “Well, that’s baloney,” and wenever see them again, you know. And you never hear of them again either.[chuckling]The ones that get it say okay, but then we counter that by saying, “Look,we’re in this for the long haul; we just hope you’re as ambitious as we are,because you won’t be able to get rid of us by going public, for example. We’llstill be there. And going public is just one event in the life of your company;it’s something we’ve done over and over. You will only do it once; we’reexperts at it. Why would we leave when we’ve done that?” And to theentrepreneur that is very self confident and believes in what he is going to do,this is not discouraging to hear from his prospective partner. In other words,I’m going to be a very strong partner; you won’t be able to get rid of me, but Iam going to stay with you, and my job is to make sure you don’t run out ofmoney.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, but I bet there are a lot of egos out there that would find that verythreatening.Perkins: Yes, there are. But this is another hidden law, and that is that the venturecapitalist cannot have the big ego. We’ve got big egos, and listening to mebabble you are going to think I’ve got one of the biggest ever. But you’ve gotto let the entrepreneurs, you’ve got to let the Bob Swansons, the JimmyTreybigs, be the super stars. The venture capitalist has to be in the backgroundas much as possible. It’s their [the entrepreneur’s] baby.It’s a complex relationship between the good venture capitalist and the goodentrepreneur. You want to guide the entrepreneur, and you want him to takeyour advice, but you don’t want to be so threatening or intimidating that theyhide anything from you. So the minute anything goes wrong, you want theentrepreneur to call you, just right away. In order for that to happen, you can’tsay, “Well, why the hell did you do that?” No, no, no, it’s got to be, “Okay,I’ll be right there. Let’s get on it.” And help—help, help, help in a totally nonthreatening way so that you solve the problem before it becomes a crisis. Andif you do this successfully you get great ventures.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I’ve read that you have done a lot of interpersonal work in these situations,getting people together who are at odds, to put it very simplistically.Perkins: Yes, right. I think that’s true. Well, I think you learn as you go along in life,you learn how to do certain things. I was a pretty good manager at HewlettPackard. I was able to handle complicated people in difficult situations.Certainly as a venture capitalist you have lots of opportunity to do that,because you’re dealing with very bright people, high motivations, big egos,and problems. It’s a complex mix.One of the longest and most serious ongoing problem that I had was therelationship between Bob Swanson and [G.] Kirk Raab at Genentech. Bobwanted to step back and spend more time with his family, enjoy his fortune,and delegate to somebody else. I didn’t push this on Bob; it was his idea. Ithought he was just doing fine and just keep on, you know? So anyway, wehired Kirk Raab, who had been president of Abbott Laboratories, and he wasgreat, and Bob was great—and they clashed all the time. Bob was nevercomfortable letting Kirk really run things, and Kirk was never reallycomfortable with having Bob around, and it was just a constant problem—andI was the glue. I think I’ve said in my book, I probably averaged a day ormaybe even two days a month just dealing with those two personalities.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Genentech was going through a rough period then too, remember?Perkins: Well, it was up, and it was down; it was everything in between. This went onfor years, so it wasn’t just a once only thing. I'd get a call, “You’ve got tocome down.” “What is it?” “Well, the annual report is coming out, and hewants his name in front of mine. [<|endoftext|>
Interviewer chuckles] I just saw the rough draftof the annual report, and he’s put his name in front of mine.” Now whoeversaid it, the CEO or the chairman, [I said:]“Just flip a coin guys!” And I’d godown—Okay, so how do you do it? How do you actually handle people like this? AndI’ll give you the secret, and it has taken me years to learn how to do this. Youhave got them both there; you’ve got to do it with both individuals, or three,no matter how many. They have all got to be there, because it doesn’t do anygood to try to do it one-on-one. It’s like you can talk to them forever and itwon’t make any difference. But if they’re both there, you say, “Okay, this iswhat I think Kirk is thinking.” You say this in front of Kirk, and then youexplain to the room, as accurately without any spin as best you can, what he isthinking. “Now this is what I think Bob is thinking,” and you do the samething as accurately, as unemotionally, as you possibly can. If you do that right,you take all of the temperature out of the water. The emotional content justcollapses, and you put on the table two quite reasonable points of view, whichwhen they look at them dispassionately you could interchange them. And soyou’re able to do that by defusing it, and it’s a neat trick. You can’t always getit right, and it doesn’t always work, but when you get it right, it solves theproblem.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And did it solve that specific problem?Perkins: Many, many, many times. But I had the trouble that it didn’t stay solved. Itstayed solved all the time I was doing it, for years. But when I left the board itblew up within ninety days.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Have you tried it in your private life?Perkins: Oh, of course, of course! [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All right, how many Perkins’ laws are there?Perkins: I don’t remember.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, here is another one: market risk is inversely proportional to technicalrisk.Perkins: Yes, that’s one. We touched on that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Okay, in the first session, you gave me the strong impression that you are notmadly in love with Wall Street.Perkins: No, I hate Wall Street.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, let’s get some basis for that statement.Perkins: First of all, there are some exceptions. William [R.] Hambrecht is anexception, and there are some others.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Sandy Robertson?Perkins: Sandy Robertson, to some extent. I can’t think of the name—he was atLehman Brothers, but he’s gone now. Anyway it doesn’t matter; the guy thatdid the Roche/Genentech merger.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: This time?Perkins: No, when I was involved; it will come to me in a minute. I remember: it’sFred Frank. So there are some exceptions. But I pretty well otherwise hadvery bad experiences with Wall Street. So my dislike for Wall Street is basedon experience. I have just been screwed and disappointed and overchargedand flummoxed so many times by these guys that I have just had it! I’ve runout of investment bankers. There is nobody left that I respect, and it’s justbased on experience.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And it’s usually—Perkins: Negative.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [laughter] I gathered. Do you want to give a specific example, or is thatenough?Perkins: Well, you know I have got to be a little careful of what I say, from a legalpoint of view, because a lot of these people are still around. Let’s just say Iwas involved in taking a company public once, and I won’t say which one itwas, and the investment banker, the principal of the investment banker, wasshorting the stock personally in his own account at the same time he wasselling it to the widows and orphans that he was supposed to be selling it to.And this is illegal.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That gives me an idea of what you’re talking about.Perkins: This is illegal! It’s against the law for one thing. The only good news is he losta lot of money on it because then the company was strong. But, this is WallStreet.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I don’t mean by that question to put you on the spot. I was just trying toget an idea of what kinds of thing you were talking about.Perkins: I attacked them in my book, and if I had only known how right I was I wouldhave done even more! And this last episode— What Wall Street has done inthe last two years is unbelievable.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: We’re running out of time, so I would like to hear what you have to say aboutCalifornia as a place where venture capital is happening, particularly sinceyour earlier career was on the East Coast.Perkins: Right. Well, first of all California isn’t the only place it can happen, and it’shappened in many other places. But there is something, or was somethingspecial at least, about California that made Silicon Valley possible. Gee, it’s alot of things that I think came together at the right time. First of all, it’s theHewlett-Packard Company, Hewlett, Packard themselves, the relationshipbetween Hewlett-Packard and Stanford University, the idea ofentrepreneurship which Hewlett and Packard had, and this ethical standardthat Hewlett and Packard set for the Hewlett-Packard Company whichpermeated through the whole valley. Which is what made the spy scandal so So that’s one.Two: the weather and the desirability of living in Northern California hasattracted brains foreverfor a long time, and it will continue to do so. Three: theuniversity environment at Cal and Stanford, obviously, in particular, but notonly the universities, but their medical schools for the whole bioscience sideof it. And, the relative willingness of—and I am going way back now into theseventies—of the Bank of America, and to some extent Wells Fargo, to lendinto fledgling ventures to a greater degree than their counterparts would havedone on the East Coast. Then, the advent of professional venture capital,Kleiner Perkins, Sutter Hill, Davis & Rock, and so forth, which happened herereally faster than it did in New York. So you add all those things up, and that’sthe explanation.And then, it’s a bit of a self-fulfilling prophecy too, as entrepreneurs begin tosucceed more people realize, yes, I can do that, too! And thirty years ago let’ssay, let’s say thirty years ago, everybody in Northern California that had acollege degree knew somebody that had been successful as an entrepreneur,knew somebody. That counterpart back East, nobody knew anybody that hadbeen successful. So, just the fact that—yes, if that guy can do it, I can do ittoo!With all the other positive factors in place—and pretty much they are allpositive—the only negative factor is that it costs so much to live here and thetaxes are high. But other than that there aren’t really any negatives that I canthink of. Plus—maybe it’s so obvious—but it’s a total meritocracy. I mean, ifyou look at the racial mix of companies that we’ve founded, it’s a UnitedNations; we’ve got everybody. You just don’t even hear or think about anyethnic or gender bias in Silicon Valley; it just doesn’t exist.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Would you think bias would be a factor elsewhere? Perkins refers to the turmoil of 2006 on the Hewlett-Packard board. For his viewpoint, see Valley Boy, chapter one.Perkins: I think it was, maybe not now, but twenty years ago, thirty years ago, sure. Imean there were clubs not that many years ago that a Jew couldn’t get intoback East.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right. Think of the medical schools, too.Perkins: Yes, but not here, not here. And there’s a lot of whacky things about SanFrancisco. God knows, it’s too much so. But its openness and its liberality wasa very good thing for venture capital. Maybe not a good thing for other thingslike drugs and God knows what else, but you know what I mean. That’s whywe love the Bay Area. I love San Francisco.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I am with you. All right—a little bit on philanthropy, and then I’ll leave youalone.Perkins: Well, what can I say?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you have a philosophy?Perkins: I have given a reasonable amount of money away, but it’s not part of a grandscheme. I don’t think I’ve had a grand philanthropic scheme. When my latewife was with me we gave quite a bit of money to the ballet.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because she liked it?Perkins: She liked it. We were both on the board of directors, and we liked it. Andthen, after her death, I gave money to medical research in her name. I built asort of—not a memorial to her, but I built a major structure in her hometownin Norway, on which there’s a little plaque with her name on it, but it isn’tabout her.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That’s the restoration project which you talk about in your book?Perkins: Yes, right. And, then there is a Perkins Foundation—Gerd and ThomasPerkins Foundation which gives money away every year.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: To anything specific?Perkins: Well, it’s typically education and medical research, and a little bit to the balletstill, but not so much anymore. I don’t go to the ballet anymore. I just gavesome money away last weekend to the Leukemia and Lymphoma Society. AlGore came out and gave a fundraising speech at my request, and I chipped inenough money to make sure that they broke the record. But I haven’t a fullythought through philosophy.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, what you would like to say in the end, to wrap this all up?Perkins: I don’t know. You’ve been extremely patient to listen to all this.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I found it extremely interesting.Perkins: I’ll look forward to, I guess, reading the summaries of what I’ve said, andwhat everybody else has said too. I’m curious to know how my views differ, ifthey do at all, from others.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, some of the people that I have talked to would certainly be paying a lotof attention to the entrepreneur.Perkins: I think that’s right. One of our most successful companies—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you want this on tape?Perkins: Sure, it’s fine. One of our most successful companies was Acuson, and thefounder/CEO of Acuson, a guy, Dr. Sam Maslak, had never had anyone workfor him, not one person. And I said, “Let’s start with you, and if you can’t doit, we’ll have to try to find somebody that can.” And he was brilliant,absolutely brilliant. I never had to worry about anything he did inmanagement. Fantastic. I think he was absolutely amazed when he came to usfor money. He had written a business plan, and honestly it was the size of theNew York phone book. He had thought of every possibility. I went throughit—pffft, like that, high speed, in about twenty minutes, and I liked thenumbers at the back.But he didn’t explain how the technology worked, and as far as I could see, itwas just going to be another me-too product. So he came in to pitch it, and hewanted to talk about markets and all that. Instead we ended up spending twohours on the principles behind acoustical diffraction. Because of my laserbackground, I was able to think in terms of the optics of sound, which is whathe was doing. It’s an optical sound system, if you will. That’s what an70ultrasonic scanner is. Well, we spent two hours, and I was persuaded he had abreakthrough idea, which he had not explained at all in his business plan. Hejust assumed nobody would understand it. And I said, “Hey! We’ll do it. Andhe said, “But you haven’t read the business plan.” I said, “Well, so what! Do Ihave to?” [chuckling]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: All right. Well, that was great as far as I am concerned. I hope it wasn’t toorepetitive for you.Perkins: No, I love to babble; I love to babble.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I don’t call it babble. [chuckling] Anyway, I thank you.
