Interviewer: Caroline Crawford and I are in a conference room at Wilson Sonsini Goodrich& Rosati. It is August 3, 2010, and we’re about to interview Lawrence R.“Larry” Sonsini. Would you like to get a glass of water before we start? Sonsini: I am going to get a cup of coffee. Will that disturb your video?Crawford: Not at all.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] We work with caffeine. Sonsini: So this is for The Bancroft Library?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: This is for The Bancroft Library. Pete Bancroft—do you know him? Sonsini: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: —very kindly funded three years of an oral history project on venture capital,which has been largely with the first generation in California—obviously notthe Rockefellers, that ilk. We’re in the third year and tailing off into peoplelike you who are very closely related, but not, I think, called a venturecapitalist, per se. Sonsini: That’s right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You should have gotten a letter about the process, but do you want me toquickly run through what happens? Sonsini: Sure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, this interview is videotaped, obviously, and then it’s transcribed asliterally as possible. It comes to me; I look at it for accuracy. I don’t changefor content. Then the transcript goes to you for review and, hopefully,approval. At some stage, all the oral histories go up on a Bancroft Librarywebsite dedicated to venture capital.  Sonsini: Great. And the video is just archived?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: The video is archived. The idea is somewhere along the line we’ll have thecapacity to make the whole thing available. We do, even now, use video clipsevery once in a while. Sonsini: Okay, good.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I will ask questions, but you take them anywhere you like. I always start wayback, which in your case, I believe, is with your parents arriving on theseshores. Do you know why they left Italy? Sonsini: Well, it actually wasn’t my parents. It was my grandparents.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, it was your grandparents. All right. Sonsini: My grandparents came from Italy and settled in upstate New York, and that’swhere I was born and raised. But at a very early age, in 1949, my father, LarryP. Sonsini, got the idea that he wanted to get out of a small town in New York.It was Rome, New York. There wasn’t much there but an air force base andRevere Copper & Brass Company.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Where he was working? Sonsini: Yes. And he packed us up, I remember, in an old green Studebaker and droveacross country. He didn’t have a job, and we ended up in Los Angeles. Myfather went looking for work and went to work for <|endoftext|>
Interviewer Aircraft Companyin Culver City. He never went to college, neither did my mother, Mary, but hewas very entrepreneurial, very smart, dynamic, and he rose to the top of theorganization at what became <|endoftext|>
Interviewer Tool Company.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And what was he doing there? Sonsini: Well, he started out in what they call quality control and later really became incharge of all flight operations. I grew up with that atmosphere, and Igraduated from high school and went to Berkeley as an undergrad. From thereI thought I was going to practice medicine, but ended up going to Boalt HallSchool of Law. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why not medicine? Sonsini: Well, that’s a question that I keep asking myself. Why not?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [chuckling] Because you’ve done so poorly in what you chose? [meantfacetiously] Sonsini: Yes, right, exactly. I think that I still have a passion for things medical andscientific. I love representing some of the life science companies we represent,because of that. But I think I got very excited with the atmosphere at Berkeleyand at the law school, the intellectual challenge and the broad menu that lawcan prepare you for. I graduated from law school [1966] obviously, and Ithought that I was going to head back East to work with one of the large NewYork firms, but—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because that was the thing to do? Sonsini: Because I wanted to be a corporate lawyer and what we call a securitieslawyer, a merger & acquisition lawyer, and most of that action was in the East.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But why that of all the kinds of law you could have chosen? Sonsini: Maybe it was something I learned from my father and his development inbusiness and his moving up through the <|endoftext|>
Interviewer organization. I worked at<|endoftext|>
Interviewer during the summers on the assembly lines, and business was a part ofthe dynamic in the family. I saw the possibility of representing differententerprises and the excitement in that. And so I was very fortunate. At the time, Silicon Valley wasn’t known asSilicon Valley, and my professor, a very fine man, Professor Richard [W.]Jennings, at Berkeley, told me that something interesting was happening downon the [San Francisco] Peninsula here. The only time I knew about thePeninsula was when— I played football and rugby at Cal, and we would comeover and play Stanford. And that’s the most exposure I had.There was a group of gentlemen, four of them, who had formed a veryinformal partnership, McCloskey, Wilson, Mosher & Martin, in 1961, and thiswas 1966. They excited me about the business plan they had, and that was torepresent young entrepreneurs and venture capitalists in building businesses,particularly in technology. No one was really doing that around here, andthere was no law firm that was really focused solely, as their business model,to do that. And they offered me great responsibility: “You’ll be our securities lawyer; you’ll be, at a very young age, on the front line.” And so I jumped atthat opportunity.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I can see why. Sonsini: As I look back, it was pretty risky, but that’s how we got started. ImmediatelyI started to get to know some of the fine, great, early entrepreneurs: BobNoyce, who invented the transistor and was a key factor at Fairchild and Intel;Gene Kleiner, who later formed Kleiner Perkins; and some of the very earlyventure capitalists, Tommy Davis and Art Rock, Don Lucas, Reid Dennis,Burt McMurtry—the list goes on and on.But it was a small club at the time, and it really was a very synergisticgrouping of entrepreneurs, venture capitalists, lawyers, accountants comingtogether to really build enterprises, funding them and helping grow them. Sovery early on, my practice was predominantly working with young startupcompanies, some that are still here today. I have a client today that was one ofmy first clients, so the company’s been with me for over forty-two years. It’s apublic company today. Coherent is its name.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Does that tend to be a pattern? That you keep clients? Sonsini: I’ve been very fortunate to keep my clients. The only time I lose them is whenthey decide to be bought or acquired or merged with somebody.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right, which you probably had something to do with. Sonsini: I do a lot of that.So in the early days, as I look back, we were beginning to formulate thetemplate for financing and growing technology enterprises.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was any other law firm headed in this direction in the mid-sixties? Sonsini: There were other law firms that were doing the work, but there was no onebased here that had that as their central business model. And so we startedrepresenting these companies, and of course, we were able to grow with thetechnology. During the seventies, late sixties, it was all about semiconductors.Silicon Valley started to get its name as Silicon Valley because of the siliconwafer that that transistors are built upon. We went through various inflectionpoints, and we really worked very closely with the early venture capitalists,developing, as I say, the investing template: how to put money together, how to value it, how to incentivize employees and make the company an attractiveplace to come to work, and how to grow it. As these companies got bigger, westarted to add more legal disciplines in our law firm, and it started to growbigger.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What do you mean by legal discipline? Sonsini: A litigation department, a tax department, an employee benefits department, atechnology department.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, I see. Sonsini: So as the needs of these startup companies broadened, they needed lawyers ofdifferent expertise, and we started to build a firm to meet those challenges.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So it’s a very reciprocal sort of— Sonsini: A very reciprocal thing. So early on, I was given the task to develop thestrategy of the firm. I remember in the 1970s making the decision that wereally wanted to build a full-service law firm, devoted to representing thetechnology or growth enterprise, and that we would have the legal talent anddisciplines that addressed at least 80 percent of the legal problems andbusiness problems that a growing business would need. And that’s how westarted to expand the firm.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You were also seeing a lacuna that you could fill, were you not? The moreestablished firms, I imagine, didn’t have the range of expertise that you weredeveloping. Sonsini: That’s correct, that’s correct. For example, we were one of the first firms tobuild technology departments of PhDs and others with advanced degrees whounderstood the technology and would focus upon technology problems:licensing, distribution of product, intellectual property protection, intellectualproperty litigation—all of the elements around technology. And as theseclients grew, they needed more access to capital, and they outgrew venturecapital. They needed access to more institutional capital and access to thepublic markets. So very early on—and this is one of the things that excited meand brought me to the firm—is I wanted to really be involved in a lot of thepublic finance and working with the capital markets taking companies public.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: These were ideas that you had as a young attorney starting out?  Sonsini: Yes, almost from the start. I think one of the benefits of being a securitieslawyer— What happened at law school is Professor Jennings asked me to behis research assistant for his textbook on securities regulation. I would do a lotof the case research for him, and it got me into the whole problem-solving ofthe issues involved in the capital markets and in mergers. And then I wasreally able, at an early age in the business, to see the growth of this legalpractice. Fortunately, I went on to takeover his classes, and I taught securitieslaw for twenty-five years at Berkeley at Boalt and contributed to the book. Soit was a passion that I had.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I can see that. Sonsini: And an expertise I worked hard at.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It sounds as though you do give him some credit for pointing you in a certaindirection. Sonsini: I certainly do. I give a lot of people credit. I give, certainly, Dick Jenningscredit for opening my eyes to the possibility here, and then a lot goes to myearly mentors, John Wilson and Roger Mosher. There was also PeteMcCloskey. But Pete McCloskey left very early to run for Congress, in 1968,I believe. He ran against Shirley Temple [Black] and became a politician. Hewas a very inspirationally driven man. It was part of the recipe of the earlydays of the firm. We had some dynamic personalities. You had PeteMcCloskey, former district attorney, trial lawyer, very politically active,running for Congress. You had Roger Mosher, graduated from Stanford, verysavvy in business. And then you had John Wilson, a true gentleman and scholar and mentor, whocame out of the East Coast, went to Princeton and then Yale, worked for thegovernment in the early days of the Atomic Energy Commission. WhenWilson came West, he went to work for a company that became a client,Hiller Helicopters. Ironically, Hiller Helicopters was the competitor to <|endoftext|>
InterviewerTool Company where my father was in business. One of the leaders of HillerHelicopters, a gentleman named Ed Bolton, was somewhat my dad’scounterpart at <|endoftext|>
Interviewer Tool because both of them made helicopters.Ultimately, <|endoftext|>
Interviewer Tool won the Apache contract that put helicopters inVietnam. But what’s interesting is Ed Bolton later became a client of mine,and he started a couple of companies. So John Wilson was just a man of greatintegrity and ethics and character, and that added balance. I was very fortunate to be put into this environment with wonderful mentors—talented, smart, visionary people. And it’s rare that you’d find threeentrepreneurial people like that in this area. The big challenge was where to go with the firm, and my vision was I wantedto build a national law firm. I wanted to be able to serve these startupcompanies even when they became multi-billion-dollar, public, globalenterprises. And of course, that’s what happened. And I think today we areprobably the most dominant brand in the legal business serving growth andtechnology enterprises of all sizes. We today represent over three thousandprivate companies and over three hundred public companies. I have reallycontinued all this time to be devoted to this growing client base, and at thesame time, even today, developing the strategy for the growth of the law firm.The issues I face today are more challenging because the world is morechallenging. But we’re still growing, opening up offices in China, and now wehave eight offices throughout the United States, and we’re adapting to thisever-growing model of technology enterprises.The wonderful thing about this, notwithstanding the tremendous complexityof it all, venture capital is still key to starting the new companies, even today.And we are doing it the same way we did it back in the 1960s really, the sametype of investment structure, addressing the same type of issues. And we’vehad wonderful successes. I’ve been very fortunate with wonderful successes,so the recipe really hasn’t changed that much. What’s changed is the scale andthe pace of scale to build real companies, and of course, we’ve had some verybig companies. Take Google—I remember when I met with Larry Page andSergey Brin, two Stanford students, one Saturday in my office, who said theywanted to start a company, and they wanted to call it Google. I thought, youcan’t name a company Google. Well, now it’s a verb, and that’s part of theexcitement of all this.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You got to where you’ve gotten, and you did it very well and verysuccessfully, but there must have been a steep learning curve even forsomebody of your background. You must have had to figure out where thefirm that you were so interested in building could fit in and be of service. Sonsini: Well, very early on, we began to realize that the pathway to take was reallydefined by where the client [the company] wanted to get to, as opposed to weleading the direction. And this was the wisdom of John Wilson. John Wilsonhad a simple saying, “Follow the client. When in doubt about investing in ourbusiness, ask yourself what are the needs of the client.” And that is somethingI never forgot and followed entirely. So we develop close relationships withthe clients, and that was a characteristic of the business then, and it hasremained a characteristic.It was a very relationship-driven business for the venture capital firm and forour law firm and for the entrepreneur. It was a symbiotic relationship, wherethere were no adversaries at the table. We were all partners, even though Iwould represent the company negotiating against the venture capitalists on their investment. There were rules of understanding about that, that we had acommon objective, and the objective was to put a structure together thatwould enable this enterprise to scale. So certain principles developed: followthe client, it will tell us where to go. So as clients had patent problems orintellectual property problems or tax problems, we added the expertise andstarted to grow with them. And yes, there were challenges all the time, about how fast to grow, how riskyis it, the competitiveness of the environment, how to work in an integratedway, how to be economically efficient—all those challenges of building abusiness. And there were difficult times. We ran into recessions. In 1974, forexample, we ran into problems in the capital markets. But all of that was noisearound this objective to build the enterprise.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That, I imagine, is not the objective of a conservative East Coast law firm. Sonsini: That’s right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: They might be engaged, but they don’t stick with the company. Sonsini: I often explain it this way: I think that when we got started, we weredeveloping what we call vertical relationships, where we would haveattorneys work on the relationship with the client and grow with it. Ahorizontal model is, you don’t work on relationships; you just work on anexpertise. So someone may say, “I’m a merger & acquisition lawyer, so onlycall me when you have a merger & acquisition problem.” Now, that was theproblem for that New York model to address this industry. However, thechallenge—and my biggest challenge—was as these companies got biggerand got public, the horizontal model was very much needed because therelationships became less important. Now you had public boards of directors;you had internal general counsels. These companies brought all of thesedisciplines internally, and now they looked to you for expertise in areas thatthey needed. So as companies grew, relationships diminished, and expertiseand skills became paramount. And the challenge was to build a law firm thatcould do both.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, you have to, don’t you? Sonsini: You have to, otherwise the client outgrows you. I think the biggestcontribution I made, besides getting caught up in the vision, was— It wasimperative for me not to have the client outgrow me. It was a passion.Because, remember, I was thinking of going to New York to be with those law firms and represent great problems and great enterprises, and I wasn’t going togive that up. So the issue was, could you develop a law firm in time, a one-generation lawfirm, in which you could build that scale. We are approaching our fiftiethanniversary, and I’m approaching my forty-fifth anniversary, and if there’sone major achievement, it’s the ability to make that transition and still berepresenting the entrepreneur in a private company today using that same oldventure capital model, and yet to be able to do work for a Google or aHewlett-Packard or some of these great big public companies we represent,and to do both. I myself have transformed what I do. I do less venture work. I used to do it100 percent. Now I do it maybe 10-15 percent and spend my time mostly witha large public company on corporate governance, corporate finance, mergers& acquisitions, regulatory matters and the like.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is that because that’s where your expertise is? Sonsini: I think it’s where my passion is, where my expertise is, where my best valueadd is. But that is what’s unique about Wilson Sonsini.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It also explains, perhaps, why the firm employs so many attorneys. Isn’t it sixhundred plus? Sonsini: Exactly, exactly.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Smart as you are, you can’t be doing it all! [laughing] Sonsini: No, you can’t. In order to work that business plan, you have to scale; you haveto grow. So yes, we are over six hundred lawyers and growing.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: In the early days, it might have been difficult to find an attorney who wouldcome to this sort of a company. Sonsini: You’re right on. A great observation. I think one of the biggest challenges was,in order to do this in a single generation, you couldn’t grow it organically.You had to go attract experienced lawyers who had good jobs and weresuccesses and have them come in and buy into this model with this high-riskventure. I spent so much of my time in recruiting, and we grew the firm bothways, hiring lawyers out of law schools like Berkeley and Stanford andHarvard, and at the same time attracting lawyers out of many of the New York firms. We grew the firm that way. And many of my most talented lawyerscame from very fine New York and San Francisco and Chicago law firms.Because you can’t do this in one generation. It’s very hard.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And you might not be able to do it in another region either. Is proximity partof it? The fact that you are here where it’s happening? Sonsini: I think that’s true too. I think that sometimes being in the right place at theright time makes many business plans very successful. And certainly that wasthe case. So the atmospherics were right. What were the atmospherics or theculture of Silicon Valley as it became? Well, it was a merit-based system, ameritocracy. It really didn’t matter where you went to school, where you grewup, what your religion was, or your background. What mattered wasperformance. Secondly, failure is not a stigma. It’s an experience, a uniquecharacteristic of the entrepreneurialism, not only of the Valley, of this country,that we can’t lose sight of. It’s a differentiator. The support systems of venturecapitalists here with capital, with banks here who buy into it, and acommunity. The universities, Stanford, California, being right here with greatresearch departments and great professors developing all this talent. Greatcompanies—Hewlett-Packard was here, Fairchild Semiconductor, IBM—abreeding ground for management. So you had to have all the right elements,and those elements came together, and that became Silicon Valley. Now, I remember in the early days people used to say, well, Silicon Valleywill mature and grow old. But what happened is the recipe was the key thing,not the geography. And so Silicon Valley really became a concept that manypeople are trying to duplicate, not a place. And that’s part of what happened.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, one reads a lot about the Silicon Alleys and thises and thatses around theplanet, none of which quite duplicate the original Silicon Valley. I guessbecause so many different ingredients make up a culture, and they’re going inin different mixes, inevitably each is going to turn out differently. Sonsini: This is very true. I have been asked to speak in many places, Europe, Asia, inthe United States, about how to replicate Silicon Valley. And we all know theelements of the recipe. I kind of outlined them. But it’s the proportions of thebrew that is the secret.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And the individuals. Sonsini: And the individuals. Quite frankly, no one has been able to duplicate it as well,and it still is growing, which is astounding to people. But it’s being slowlyabsorbed and adopted in many places. If I look at the entrepreneurial culture in China, for example, I see many similarities. But some cultures were notadaptable. Japan and Europe really never bought into some of the elements.Business failure is a stigma in so many cultures, not in the United States. Thelateral movement of employees here, the idea that you go to work for HewlettPackard and in a couple of years leave to start up a company.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you were in the right place at the right time. I think there is somethingabout the time that you entered—the mid-sixties when things were ready to go. Sonsini: There is. No doubt about it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So there’s an element of luck involved. Sonsini: There is. I have been very fortunate. Timing has been a major factor.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What was the legal profession thinking of you in those early days? Sonsini: [laughing] Well, I think, because of the culture that John Wilson had ofintegrity and ethics—and we were always respected—I think the attitude was,can you really grow it? It’s very hard. And I think people doubted that youwould be able to scale the firm, and so the competition would say, “Yes,they’re very good working with the entrepreneur. But as you get biggerproblems as you grow bigger, they don’t have this, they don’t have that.” So itwas always what we didn’t have. Of course, part of growing the business wasgetting what we needed.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Who was the competition in the early days? Sonsini: It was mainly in the early days firms here on the West Coast, mainly in SanFrancisco, firms like Pillsbury Madison & Sutro (that was the name at thetime), Brobeck Phleger and Harrison, Cooley Godward.As technology became so important to the economics of this country, and asSilicon Valley became more powerful and the businesses grew, thecompetition changed. It was from the East, where the New York firms cameand opened up offices here. And so the legal services expand with externalcompetition coming in.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did the West Coast offices of the eastern firms pick up aspects of the modelyou describe?  Sonsini: They picked up aspects. Some tried to duplicate it, but no one really has. Butmany of them brought in layers of horizontal expertise to compete, and that’swhat we deal with.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I read of your three circles concept. Sonsini: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You follow a firm through its trajectory, developing the expertise as it’sneeded? Sonsini: Yes. That is the model that no one has been able quite to replicate.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And the three circles are what? Sonsini: The three circles is something I came up with to describe this business model.The first circle was serving the entrepreneur and venture capital industry, thestartup company, the early-stage enterprise. As that enterprise grew, it reachedan inflection point that moved it into the second circle, and the second circle isabout the company becoming a public enterprise. And the disciplines changed,the legal disciplines that you needed to take it public and then to serve it. Thethird circle is when the enterprise broke through to be a multi-billion dollarglobal company. Its needs changed again. We wanted to build a law firm thatcould service this enterprise in each of those stages of growth. But as theygrew, moving from the first circle, where you did not need a lot of legal talent,to that third circle, where every legal problem in the world is present, youexpand the law firm to serve the mature enterprise.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: In those early days when you started, I imagine you were dealing with naïveentrepreneurs who knew next to nothing about building a company. Maybethat’s less true now with practically every scientist I know having some sort ofan industrial connection. But in those days that was not so true. So did youprovide quite a bit of education/advice, not just in the legal area, but also inthe business area? Sonsini: Very much so. The firm’s business was really characterized by a lot ofbusiness advice. And that was the unique aspect. Why I love this practice somuch is because I love the business side of it, being a businessperson, dealingwith business problems, and using legal solutions as only a means to solvebusiness problems. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Very interesting. Sonsini: And that is the lawyer I became, and the kind of lawyers we’ve built here. Ofcourse, that is still relevant today, but it’s different. With this wonderfulInternet, knowledge is ubiquitous, and you have all these opencommunications, and you have so much touching base with people all overthe world instantly. Knowledge is everywhere, and it changes that model,because the entrepreneur today is still naïve in building a business but has somuch information available. So now it’s a question of filtering information aswell as providing business solutions.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you find, in general, that entrepreneurs listen to you seriously? Sonsini: I think so. I’ve seen enough things that I think they haven’t seen.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: In the early days was it a problem for you, a young, wet-behind-the-earsattorney? Sonsini: Yes, of course. But that was part of growing up and maturing and developingsome wonderful relationships with people who took me along.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You mentioned at the beginning a number of early venture capitalists. Wasthere any tendency to work with one partnership rather than another? Sonsini: Not really.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Or, I’m dealing with a semiconductor company so I should go to KleinerPerkins [Caufield & Byers]—anything that steered you in one direction oranother when it came to venture capital? Sonsini: No, in the early days there weren’t that many venture capital firms, so youdidn’t have a big menu. But then as the industry grew, and they became morediversified, many of the firms started to develop particular domain expertise—life sciences, semiconductor—that led you to select that way. But you know,the venture capital industry never got that big, so the unique thing is you dealtwith most of the firms.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: In the early days, you must have learned where people’s expertise lay, whomyou trusted, people’s track record, in a way that I imagine, with everything somuch larger now, it’s harder to know individuals and their history. Does that influence in any way your decisions about who you are going to deal withwhen you’re setting up a company? Sonsini: Well, very much so. The landscape has gotten more sophisticated, morespecialized, the business challenges are tougher in many respects. They’reglobal, competition is severe, access to capital is different. You need morecapital. So certainly, you migrate towards talent and expertise and judgment.Relationship is a nice thing to have, but it’s not at the level that it was. But,once you do have those disciplines in place, the relationships grow, becauseyou still need relationships to build enterprises. You still need the ability tocommunicate, to share views, to dialogue—now it’s just a more complicated,more sophisticated, a more knowledgeable game.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Would you be less likely to deal with an enterprise if you felt that theindividuals involved were not going to cooperate with you? Sonsini: You know, my filter now is— The most important thing initially is theintegrity and ethics of the individual. I don’t try to make a judgment whetherthis business is going to be successful or not to take it as a client.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, you don’t? Sonsini: No, because business is too hit or miss. You never know if a Google is goingto become a Google. I just got a call today from a couple of people that wantto start a company. I have no idea whether it’s going to be successful, but Idon’t even care. What I care about is, do they have the integrity and ethics toreally do the right thing? Are they committed? Are they excited with their idea?And if it gets to that stage, then I’ll start to work with them.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now that seems a little different than the way a venture capitalist wouldapproach it, because he/she is dealing with other people’s money, right? Sonsini: Exactly. Now the venture capitalist will probably begin the same way I do.But they’ll have to take it a step further, because they are managing someoneelse’s money. They are a fiduciary, so they have to be totally committed thatthe business plan may be a success. So they take it to a different level.Now, I spend a lot of time making those judgments too, because when thesepeople come to me and ask me to help them get funded, that’s when I start tomake a judgment on the business plan, not because I’m any expert, but beforeI recommend them to a Sequoia, or an NEA [New Enterprises Associates], ora Kleiner Perkins, I have to have some sense that there’s something here for them to look at. They’ll make the judgment better than I, but they’ll know thatI’ve gone through at least a filter. And I think that’s why a lot of people comehere not only for the legal expertise but for that filter.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes. And they know that. Sonsini: And they know that. And of course, if it’s a totally oddball idea that I think isway out there, I’ll turn it down of course. But I don’t do what the venturecapitalist has to do, and that is really drill down into the technology, into themarkets, into the competition, into the return. That’s their job. That’s whatthey do.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That’s an interesting distinction. Now where did I read this? Your choice has always been the company interms of representation, rather than representing the venture capitalpartnership or the investment banker. Is that all part of your concentration onthe company itself—that wanting to build it, at least in a structural/legal way? Sonsini: Yes. The presumption is to represent the enterprise, the company. But in orderto do that with experience and judgment, we also represent the venturecapitalists, the investment bankers, where we’re not conflicted. That isimportant, because you need to know all sides of the equation. So we do a lotof work for the venture capital firms when they’re investing, and we don’trepresent the company. We represent some of the finest investment bankingfirms, the Goldman Sachs, Morgan Stanleys, the J.P. Morgans, et al. of theworld, where we are not company counsel. But our preference is to becompany counsel, but we can’t represent everybody. So when we don’t, andthey’re represented by someone else, we often will be on the side representingthe venture capitalist, and the investment banking firm, and the private equityfirm. That’s a large part of what we do.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But is the largest part still representation of the company? Sonsini: Yes. The largest part is representing what we call the enterprise, the company.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Because that’s your preference? Sonsini: That’s the business plan, and that’s where I think the excitement andrelationships are, because when you represent a venture capitalist, it’s for atransaction. When you represent a company, it’s for all seasons, you growwith it, and there’s where the challenge and expertise and excitement is. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I have to look at my notes. Anything more to say about competitors? Youmentioned Brobeck. What about Ware Freidenrich and Latham & Watkins?When do they come in? Sonsini: Well, Ware & Freidenrich was here early. They were one of the earliercompetitors. They later got acquired and merged and became a part of abigger firm. Latham & Watkins is a wonderful law firm that has grown into agreat success, but their business model in the early days was not my businessmodel. It was a different business model. It was more of a New York modeland, of course, that’s why they are big in New York and around the world.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Meaning that they didn’t have the three circles idea? Sonsini: Right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was Latham’s a deliberate choice not to be a Wilson Sonsini? Sonsini: I don’t know. You’ll have to ask them.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you adopting anything from anybody else? From the other law firmsthat gradually come into the Valley? Or at least focused on the Valley? Sonsini: You mean during the early days?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Any time. Sonsini: I learned a lot from many firms, of course. Don’t forget, I was starting out as ayoung lawyer, and I’ve only had one job professionally, and I’ve only been inone place, and so I’ve learned a lot from a lot of great lawyers. Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Thinking back to the struggling startup, particularly as you gained inreputation in the Valley, how could a startup afford you? Sonsini: Well, the fees were very low and always have been in venture capital.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: For that very reason.  Sonsini: For that very reason, and probably one of the reasons why many of the big,large New York firms didn’t adopt the model.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Not enough money in it. Sonsini: It’s the economics. But you see, we were able to build up the base of clients,so when they got bigger and public, the legal work funded the growth and therisk of taking on the young client. And of course, we were so small—therewere four or five of us when we got started, and so we didn’t need manysuccesses to keep our firm going. So the flywheel of the three circles provesthe economics. It would be very hard to come into the business—and I thinkthat’s why many firms have a tough time competing with us—with a big costinfrastructure.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Even today? Sonsini: Even today. Even today, I think that we don’t make a lot of money on ourstartups.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why do you bother then? Sonsini: Because they become Googles! [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What becomes WS Investments? You have to carry it here, because I reallyam weak in this area. Sonsini: WS Investments is a partnership of the partners in the firm, where we set abudget, and we invest in startup companies only at the very early stage, andwe average maybe less than $100,000 in the company. The reason why we didWS Investments is when we were starting to grow the [Wilson Sonsini] firm,we began to realize that these investment opportunities came to the corporatelawyers working with the venture capital firms. But remember I said in orderto build a full-service firm, I needed more than corporate lawyers. I neededlitigators, tax lawyers, I needed technology lawyers, merger & acquisitionlawyers, anti-trust lawyers—the list goes on. And they would not see theopportunity [for investment], and that, to me, created an unfairness. Whyshould the corporate people get the opportunity to invest and not the otherpartners who are going to be very important to the success of this enterprise?So we adopted a rule: no one gets to invest personally. What we do is, we’llset up a partnership which we all share in pro rata, and that’s the investmentopportunity. And that was WS Investments. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I see. When was it started? Sonsini: I would say we started it in the late seventies.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Really! Early on then.[End Audio File 1]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Done Deals: [Venture Capitalists Tell Their Stories] contains an interviewwith you. The interviewer asked whether lawyers are too close to the venturecapital business, and, I would add, to this investment partnership as well. Isthere a conflict of interest somewhere in having these very close financial andbusiness relations? Sonsini: Not the way we run it and the way we think about it. First of all, on theinvestment side: we take a very small investment, purposefully, so that we donot have a significant or material equity position in any company, and wedon’t have a lot of dollars at work. And I think that we’ve been able tomanage that. And the fact that it is not a decision of the individual lawyer, butwe have a special committee that makes the investment decision, and it’sautomatic and mandatory, we think puts in the systems that really protectclient interests and attorney-client ethics and integrity. And many firms havedone this in different forms.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So when you began WS Investments in the late seventies, if indeed that iswhen it was, was it commonplace in the legal profession? Sonsini: No, not necessarily common in the legal profession. It was not unusual here.Many of the firms had different kinds of policies. I believe Brobeck had nopolicy that allowed lawyers to invest individually. Other firms had differentpolicies. So it’s been proven. I actually think it started in the early seventies,not the late seventies. It’s been around. And over time, we’ve been reasonablysuccessful with it. It has its ups and downs. The budget has never grown withthe size of the firm, necessarily. So that really hasn’t posed a problem. The other issue, about being too close to the venture capitalists or too close tothe client, that really isn’t a problem either. These are all intelligent people,and you are building a partnership designed to build a successful business.And it’s important that you have conflict policies. It’s important that you have rules and procedures, that you have appropriate disclosure of relationships,that you have waivers of conflicts. So we have a system here. We have alawyer who is a full-time, in-house general counsel to manage those issues.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Does that go back a ways? Sonsini: It goes back a long ways.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That you had a person. Sonsini: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I read that you have a reputation for being very ethical. Sonsini: That’s always been an important thing to me. In this business you really haveonly a couple of things: one, you have your integrity and then yourjudgment—and then maybe a third, your experience. So integrity, judgment,and experience are really what you’re selling. Some people say you have anetwork, some people say you have access to certain things—maybe on themargin. But the most important thing is the ethics, the integrity, thejudgment—and that’s what you’re selling in this business.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, that leads to the question of culture, which I imagine has been anevolving thing. But could you characterize the culture of Wilson Sonsini? Andsay how it might be different from anybody else? Sonsini: Yes. Culture is a big thing to me and to the firm. And it has many elements.We talk about it all the time and have really built the firm on the basis of it.One element of it is diversity. I believe strongly in diversity. We have beenranked as recently, I think, as last year as the number one firm in the countryamong all law firms, as the number one firm leading in diversity.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Diversity in the widest sense? Sonsini: In the widest sense—ethnicity, gender, color, creed. And it’s very important.We have to keep working at it. I wish we had more women partners, forexample. But I think we have a very diverse group—that’s important. 20 A second culture is consensus building. I believe very much in consensusmanagement. That is to say, a very transparent business plan where peoplereally commit to the vision of the firm.The third principle is one of high integrity and ethics. You can’t reallyrepresent an enterprise with all these multiple relationships without beinghighly respected, because you want people to trust you with major businessdecisions. And without that trust, you’re not going to be really solving theproblems. You’re not going to know the problems. So trust is critical.Another culture element is meritocracy. Our compensation is not lockstep.There’s no such thing as tenure. It’s all based upon performance and quality ofwork.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How would you judge quality of work? Sonsini: Well, we spend a lot of time talking about it and evaluating it ourselves.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So it’s not just a matter of deals and money brought in? Sonsini: No, it’s a potpourri of issues.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Can you give me an idea, when you and your partners are sitting around thetable, of the sort of things that you would be looking at? Sonsini: We look at the feedback from the client base, reputation in the market,productivity, quality of growth, ability to mentor others, leadership—thosekinds of qualities that all law firms at some level do. So these are the cultural aspects, which were very important to me. I learnedvery early on that you have to have a vision that you can articulate. And thenyou needed a culture to marry that vision. And then you wanted to stay reallyflexible to adapt to change. Those are the principles I was fortunate to learnvery early. I probably learned from others—I don’t know how those thingscame to me, but I think those are the elements. Because if you have a vision,then people really can get on the same page, otherwise there’s chaos. And it’svery hard to have a culture with confusion and chaos.And then the other thing is the adaptability to change, because if there’s onething I’ve learned, it is that everything is going to change. There’s theunpredictability of it all. You have to get comfortable with that. Sometimesit’s scary, but it’s a very unpredictable world. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Can you get comfortable with change? A person who likes things precise, Iimagine! Sonsini: It’s always a personal dilemma for me. That’s why I wake up at four o’clockin the morning some days of the week. Sure, you want control. You want to bein control. You want to seek perfection.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, there are two things that occur to me as you describe the culture. I readthat at one point Wilson Sonsini had eight hundred-plus attorneys. Sonsini: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How can you possibly instill a unifying culture with an organization that large? Sonsini: Boy, that was hard. That was before the dot-com bubble burst. That was in thebull market of all bull markets—1998-99.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, tell me about all that. Sonsini: Oh, it was a phenomenal time and a scary time.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You probably lost some control, didn’t you? Sonsini: We did. It was too hectic, too busy. In 1999 we, I think, were involved inmore than 120 public offerings. We grew to 820 lawyers; today we’re 620. Itwas a time of a lot of excess, a time when capital was available to anybusiness, a time when we were taking companies public that were two yearsold. Of course, it couldn’t last, and it all came crashing down.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you predict that at some level? Sonsini: No, I didn’t predict it. I worried about it because I was obviously running thefirm and saw this tremendous growth and saw that it was hard to pay attentionto allocate resources; it was hard to mentor associates; it was hard. And itcreated enormous business challenges.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you trying to take steps to somehow rein it in? Or was it beyond all that?  Sonsini: Oh yes. We were trying to decide what business to take and what business toturn away, how to share resources by using outsourcing, contract attorneys, allsorts of things.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And now that you have shrunk to 620, that’s manageable? Sonsini: Oh yes. It is, and of course we have evolved our management structure. That’swhat you have to look for—you have to come out of the storm, not only alive,but you’ve got to come out with some learning. So we changed ourmanagement structure. There was a lot of issues in the firm about— I wasvery much a major business-getter, and I was chairman, and I was CEO, and Isuppose people called me a founder. How can you build a business with somuch concentration? You need succession, and yet I wasn’t going anywhere.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [laughing] I’ll bet you weren’t. Sonsini: I’m one of these people who wants to keep going in what I do and keep going.We had to change. And we did. We put in a full-time CEO—one of mypartners. John [V.] Roos became CEO, and we proved it could work. I provedthat I could let go and have only one person report as opposed to ten. Heproved that he could manage with me, and lo and behold he is now theambassador to Japan. He was appointed a year ago, and so now we haveanother CEO, Steve [Steven E.] Bochner, and he is now developing hisadministration. I think that this has been an enormous plus for the firm, thatpeople look at the institution and say okay, we see the success. We see it’s afirst-generation firm. The big challenge—one of the big challenges—is, can ithave succession? Can there be leadership after the original group? And I’mthe only one left out of the original group. I think that we’re proving that aswe go, and I think that was a necessity that came out of all of that growth.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Are the people at the top appreciative of the continuity? The continuity andchange I guess would be the two things, wouldn’t they? Sonsini: Very much so. I think people are very excited about it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So are you now just solely Larry Sonsini, partner? Sonsini: No, I’m still chairman.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, you’re chairman, so you still have quite a say.  Sonsini: I focus primarily on the strategic direction of the firm, the culture of the firm,the business model of the firm, and I step out of day-to-day operations.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is that a pleasure? Sonsini: I think it is. I think it comes natural to me. It’s always a challenge. Yes, it is apleasure. I feel a sense of responsibility, but also I think it’s a good use of mytalent at this particular time.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: This next question goes back in time. In 1978 the firm was renamed. Is that assimple as you lost McCloskey? Or was there a reorientation? Sonsini: I think 1978 was a bit of an inflection point when we split with Roger Mosher,a name partner, very fine lawyer and person, a mentor of mine along withJohn Wilson. It was a very difficult thing for me because I was caughtbetween the two of them. And I think that we had a disagreement on where togo, too. I think that John and I wanted to build a national, global law firm. Ithink Roger was more cautious about that and more concerned and probablynot as in tune with the changes that had to be made to do that. So we agreed todisagree and split the firm, and it was a difficult thing. You learn from that.And that’s when the firm, I think, really started to take off. That’s when Johnreally put me in the position of leadership of the firm as a young lawyer, andwhen I started really to develop the model and build the firm. So yes, it was avery important time.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So how old were you then? We must be the same age, because I was in thesame class as you at Berkeley. [chuckling] Sonsini: Yes, so I was born in 1941.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So forty-one from seventy-eight is thirty-seven. Sonsini: It’s thirty-seven years old.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That seems young. Sonsini: Why, looking back, it seems young! [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: To all of us in this room!  Sonsini: At the time I wasn’t young at all.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But none of this phased you? Have you ever had doubts? Sonsini: [pause to think] I never had doubt about the commitment and the direction andthe principles. There was always doubt about execution, right? There are fearsthat you have to face, challenges. But no. I think part of that was the Valleyand the momentum. It wouldn’t let you quit. [laughing] The relationships Ihad, the clients that I could talk to— I was growing businesses alongside ofpeople who were my age, entrepreneurs. We would get together and talk aboutour businesses, and we’d learn that a lot of our problems we had in common.So there was an infrastructure there to rely upon that I didn’t even knowbefore, and that was the beauty of it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You were all venturers, in a sense. Sonsini: We were all entrepreneurs; we were growing up together.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It must have been an exciting time. Sonsini: Very exciting. It’s still exciting. It’s exciting today. The problems are different.These are very challenging times. This last decade has been a brutal decade.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, talk about that a little, and how Wilson Sonsini might have made somechanges because of the external circumstance. Sonsini: I think through the sixties, seventies, eighties, and nineties, we were almost onautomatic pilot. Technology was changing in each decade—semiconductors inthe seventies, computers in the eighties, software, life sciences, the Internet.And it was all about blocking and tackling and staying committed, buildingculture, staying true to the vision. Along comes this decade—2000, and things change dramatically. You havethe dot-com bubble burst. The Dow greatly declines. NASDAQ goes from5,000-plus down to 2,500. Everything comes to a halt. We were said to haveled the nation in public offerings in 1999 with over 120; I think we led thenation in the year 2000 with six. A dramatic change. And then 9/11 comesalong a year later, shakes the momentum of the nation. We start to build back,and then we run into the biggest recession since the Depression, that we’restarting to come out of, and in the middle of it we have a war that’s still going on. We have the globalization of technology—other nations, China, Russia,Brazil, Israel, India, and others growing rapidly and competing.So this decade has been very, very challenging. It’s a decade where venturecapital has shrunk. The venture capital industry is having its worst decade inits history. The financial markets have returned in this decade less money thanany decade in our history, even lower than the decade following theDepression. This has been a daunting time. I’m very proud that we continue tothrive and represent great enterprises and have grown technology through allof that, but it’s changing who we are. It’s challenging us. How global do webecome? We have an office in Shanghai and have been debating Hong Kong,Beijing, Israel, India. Those are tough questions. Our East Coast offices areexpanding. Does our business model have to adapt and change again whenyou enter those markets?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: The answer would be yes, right? Sonsini: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But how? Sonsini: How. It’s a phenomenal story as we go into the next half century of this firm’shistory, and of course the leadership is going to change too.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is there an attempt to disseminate the Wilson Sonsini culture to all thesedifferent offices? Sonsini: Oh, absolutely. As long as I’m here there’s going to be an attempt.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: We should draw this to a close, but I want first to find a statement from theAmerican Lawyer. It is an allegation that Wilson Sonsini has never brokeninto the New York establishment “club”. Do you care? Have you tried? Hasthat been a goal? Sonsini: We are committed to building out our New York office. We have over fortylawyers there now, and our Washington DC office is a very successful office.It’s not the New York club that I aspire to, but it’s to be able to represent theenterprises and the capital market players in the leading financial center of the December 2005. world. I don’t have it totally figured out, to be honest with you. We’ve gotsome wonderful talent, and we’re doing well, but that is a big market, andwe’re going to have to scale it. It’s going to have to get bigger, and that’s amajor priority.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: A bigger market and different companies, right? Sonsini: Bigger market, different companies, different game, different competitors.Yes—it’s a major priority of ours.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But a very difficult one, I should think. Sonsini: It’s a difficult one, we’re in the middle of it right now, studying it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Does your name and reputation from what you’ve done here help you? Sonsini: Oh, very much so.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: The East Coast people don’t say, oh those techie guys, they don’t do the kindof law that we do. Sonsini: No, I think that we’ve gone well beyond that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, we haven’t talked about your involvement with the New York StockExchange. Do you want to say a word about that? Sonsini: Well, I’m very proud of the fact that I was a member of the board of the NewYork Stock Exchange, and I’ve chaired a number of its committees andcontinue to chair a committee. I chair the Commission on CorporateGovernance.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did the president create that? Sonsini: It was created by the chairman/CEO of the New York Stock Exchange and theboard. So that is something I’m proud of. It’s something I take very seriously.It’s a very important institution in this country. And I take that responsibilityreally to heart. I think it’s a credit to the firm that we’re three thousand milesaway, but given our experience and our judgment and our integrity, that wecan add value to that institution.  So no, I think that New York would properly say that Wilson Sonsini wouldprobably have to modify its model to be a player of significance in New York,and it will have to scale it, and the question is will it, should it, and can it? Ithink the jury’s out on all three! [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, time will tell.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You were asked to be chairman when [Richard A.] Grasso “departed”—to putit gracefully. Sonsini: Yes. There was a day when there was a crisis, and I think the idea came fromHank Paulson, who was running Goldman Sachs at the time and becameSecretary of the Treasury. There was a desire to have interim leadership tohelp stabilize the situation, and they asked me to do it and gave me about threeor four hours to decide. And I said no, that this wasn’t in the best interests ofthe Exchange. I would have loved doing it, but I believed that we needed tobring in an independent outsider to restore integrity. I was part of the Grassoadministration; I thought the world of him. I was involved in their governancecommittee with Leon Panetta, a wonderful, wonderful man, now the head ofthe CIA. And I think we all collaborated and said yes, we’d better form acommittee and find someone.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you involved in Grasso’s compensation package that hit the news withnot very nice repercussions? Sonsini: I wasn’t involved on the compensation committee, no.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you said no because you were too closely aligned with the— Sonsini: No. It required a full-time position and a long-term commitment, and I don’tthink I was in a position to serve as effectively as was required.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Would taking the position on the Exchange have required moving to NewYork? Sonsini: I think so, to do it right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [shuffling papers] I can’t find the quote, but it comes from the introduction toyour interview in the Done Deals book. It said something to the effect that Do you buy that? Sonsini: I was part of a small group of us that did it together. I think I helped, withothers, to establish the infrastructure of the technology industry as we see it inSilicon Valley, and helped set the recipe for the culture, relationships, attitudeand diversity, and all those factors I mentioned. I think, yes, I was a part of it,and I think we did some good things.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I thank you. Sonsini: Thank you. You’re very kind. 
