Interviewer: Please start by saying where you came from and what that meant for what wasto come. So please tell me about your family and education.Winblad: Well, I grew up in a small town in Minnesota, Farmington, Minnesota. I’msort of like Rebecca of Sunnybrook Farm, although my dad “Soup” Winbladwas a high school basketball coach and my mom Elizabeth was a nurse. Mymom is a first generation American of German origin and my dad is secondgeneration Swedish.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Hence the name.Winblad: Yes, hence the name Winblad [pronouncing name in Swedish]. My parentswere both born in Red Wing, Minnesota, where I was born as well, a townright on the Mississippi River where they have leather tanneries and potteries.My grandfather John Winblad was a motorcycle repairperson after his farmburned down. My other grandfather Adolph Utark worked in one of thefactories in Red Wing. My dad was the first one in his generation to go tocollege. My mom went to nursing school and her younger brother was the firstone to go to college. So my parents placed a very high value on education. I’mthe oldest of six children. My dad taught us to be focused on learning buthighly competitive. Therefore I’m probably unique in that I was both the classvaledictorian and the head basketball cheerleader.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh my!Winblad: Usually considered an oxymoron. I was in high school just as Title IX came tobe, so I missed out on competitive women’s sports, although I was on the firstwomen’s track team in our high school, and I did get a medal in the districttrack meet competition in the long jump. The only athletic letter I had beforethat was in cheerleading, so I was glad to get a real one after that. And that’spretty much my story.My dad’s greatest earnings power was as a master degree teacher. He receivedhis masters in guidance counseling. After he retired from coaching, he becamethe high school guidance counselor, made $18,000. My parents successfullyraised six children. Four of us are college graduates. My brother went tocommunity college and my youngest sister to nursing school.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That’s quite a story, isn’t it? Winblad: Yes, it is.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You said that he taught you to be competitive. Did that mean in getting ahead?Academics? Or just in life in general?Winblad: I think competition to him— My father ended up with five daughters and oneson, and he grew up in a family with five brothers and one sister. So he had allthese little girls. One of my fondest memories of my dad, who passed awaytwo years ago, is when my mom would ask him to tell us bedtime stories he’dcome in with his chalkboard and say, “Okay, tonight girls we’re going to learna pick and roll.” So we learned the basketball plays, and we really understoodthat there was much more to the game than just the brute force of winning,that there really was strategy. My father took several teams to the state tournament, and his first team inFarmington went to the state tournament. At his memorial when he passedaway, three of his starters showed up. My dad was eighty-six and a reallyyoung coach when he was coaching, so these players were eighty years old.But it was great for me to hear from them what an impact being well coachedmade on their lives, not just winning but being well coached. So winning andachievement meant a lot of things. It meant really understanding the strategyof the game, really understanding how to be a team player, and more thananything what coaching means. In many ways, transitioning from being anentrepreneur, which I was, to a venture capitalist, means a transition frombeing a player to being a coach.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That’s interesting; I hadn’t heard it put so succinctly. Did you feel thepressure, being the oldest? In a traditional family of that era, it’s the boys thatare supposed to get ahead, and the girls trail after them. But I’m suspectingthat that wasn’t true in your case. [laughing]Winblad: The great thing about being the oldest girl is you get a lot of attention fromyour dad because you’re the first one. I’m probably the only girl who actuallyspent time in the boys’ locker room. My mom had a rule on Saturdays whenmy dad would take us to the gym to get things organized for the team, “Do notbring her in the locker room.” Of course, the first thing my dad did was say tous, “We’re going to go in the locker room. There’s nothing in there to worryabout. Just don’t tell your mother.” And of course the first thing I do is,“Where were you?” [my mother asked.] “I was in a locker room,” [I replied].Being raised a good Catholic girl, you never lie. But there was really nomystique about the men’s locker room for me. I spent a bunch of time in it. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: [laughing] That must have been formative—opened some doors that otherwisewould be shut, I would think.What impact has religion had on your life?Winblad: My dad is not Catholic. My dad is Lutheran, and in order for my mother tomarry him—and my mother is a very staunch Catholic—they could not bemarried inside the church. They had to be married in the priest’s house, andmy father had to pledge that he would raise us Catholic. So every Sunday mydad would drop us off at the Catholic church, and he would go to the Lutheranchurch. In our small town, there was not a Catholic school. In a smallcommunity in Minnesota, everybody knows the priests, everybody knows thenuns, everybody knows everybody at church. But it was much more thespirituality of the community versus the staunchness of a religion. Today I’m on the board of trustees of the University of St. Thomas, which is adiocesan university but has a very, very strong Catholic mission. So it hasbecome part of my life. I think it really helps you understand what having amission as well as a goal means, really how important integrity is aboveeverything, especially in fiercely competitive and a very Darwinian climatelike Silicon Valley.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Do you care to say more about high school? Your position as valedictoriantells me right away that you didn’t have any problems academically, but wereyou on a track in a certain direction?Winblad: I was very lucky when I went to school in the sixties and early seventies thatthe Minnesota public school system was extraordinary. I was an ungradedstudent for half of my elementary school classes, so when I was in third gradeI was in classes with sixth graders. There were college preparatory classes,and so it was really, really a great education. I think teachers make a bigdifference to you, and your value of teachers do. I had extraordinary teachersin elementary school who focused on accelerated math, so I got to lovemathematics. That was never something that seemed unnatural to me. Wedidn’t have computer science when I was a high school student, so I learnedthat in college. In particular, my math teachers were very extraordinary. Mr.Kunesh, my sixth-grade teacher who focused on mathematics had puzzles hehad us work on. Jack Ulrich, who was the advanced math teacher in highschool, was really a taskmaster but he made math fun. I remember best from my high school math class there was a boy whom I willnot name who sat behind me, and he was horrible at math but he was tallerthan me. It doesn’t take much; I’m only five two and three-quarters. And so I was really aware that all through high school he was copying my math papers.And I thought, you know, it’s his choice.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You didn’t say anything?Winblad: I didn’t say anything. But he became a millionaire. He built a very, verysuccessful plumbing supply business, became very good at all the things thatbasic mathematics require—inventory management, pricing, distribution. Hetold me later that he actually learned math by copying my math pages.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you served—Winblad: I served a purpose, because he really couldn’t follow the teacher. But he wasso thoughtful in copying my math that he learned a lot. So there are differentways of teaching. I’m glad I never raised my hand and said he was copyingmy papers. [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was it just a natural step to go to—is it University of St. Thomas?Winblad: [College of] Saint Catherine’s.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, Saint Catherine’s. It was close by and it was Catholic.Winblad: Well, I really wanted to go to one of the Ivies or somewhere like Stanford, butrealistically there was no money even for a plane ticket to go do theinterviews. I went to Saint Catherine’s. It had high academic standards, and itwas part of a five-college cooperative. I could take classes at Macalester, St.Thomas, Augsburg, and Hamline. And so I was part of a very good fivecollege set. Many of these are nationally recognized colleges, including St.Thomas. When I went there, I was very disappointed because I was anaggressive overachiever, and I didn’t think it was hard enough. So I remembercoming back at Thanksgiving and crying and saying, “I have to go to a betterschool, Dad, I have to,” and my dad sitting me down and saying, “Look, youhave a big scholarship here, you have jobs, there’s no travel associated with it.This is all we can really afford and all that you can really afford, so make thebest of it.” It was a disappointment to me, but I actually did make the best ofit.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And you did find computer science? Winblad: I did. And here I was very fortunate, because we had a semester breakprogram, and during our break time we’d pick classes. We had DigitalEquipment on our campus in a computer center that DEC ran. One of the mathprofessors, Sister Seraphine, decided to teach programming and got DEC toagree that we could all go into the computing center for the university. Shetaught the interim there.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Now was that unusual in that day?Winblad: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: This is early seventies?Winblad: Yes, this is early seventies. Computer science was not a major in most places.In fact it was part of the liberal arts major even at Stanford. Sister Seraphinebecame ill, so I had to step up to the plate and teach that class the nextsemester.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did that strike terror in your soul?Winblad: No. [laughter] Nothing strikes terror in my soul.Then a number of things happened. One of the professors at St. Thomasstepped forward to build a computer science-quantitative methods major there,and his name was Steve Nachtscheim. I took those classes at St. Thomas.Steve left St. Thomas to become an executive at Intel, and years later I metSteve at Intel. I later recruited Steve to the University of St. Thomas board oftrustees where he and I both serve today. Steve’s only a couple years olderthan me. So Steve said, “No, there’s no way you were in my class.” And Isaid, “I was the only woman. How could you forget me? And I was good inyour class! Look—here’s the textbook. I’ve kept it, and here is the instructor’sname in it, and it is your name. And there’s only one Stephen Nachtscheim.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Not the most common name.Winblad: So fortunately for me, classes appeared at St. Thomas. I was able to take them.There was no major but it was really fun.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Nobody was saying to you, “Listen, this is a male purview. You’re going tohave trouble here.” There was no anti-feminine stuff going on? Winblad: No one ever. By the time I got to the end of the math major, it’s me and threeguys. The business major, it’s me and the guys. No one ever said that to me.Fortunately, this whole multiple campus situation, it was liberal arts collegesfor the most part with strong math and computer science offerings during thatperiod of time that got stronger over time. In that I was lucky. Had I been fiveyears earlier, I might have had an inferior math major, and I might have beenbusiness and liberal arts, which I don’t think would have been adequate for mein the profession I chose.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Your original ambition to go east may not have been the best place for you tobe in that era.Winblad: Yes, and when you say how could you rewrite your life, mine is like aplaybook. So it was very fortunate when I graduated in ‘73, undergraduate, itwas a big affirmative action year, so everybody wanted diversity. Well, guesswhat—I’m the only graduate who’s got a math major, a business major, andcomputer science classes. I was highly sought after, so I got a very, very goodjob after college, in fact one that I was barely qualified for, so it was a greatstretch job for me.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And where was it?Winblad: At the Federal Reserve Bank as a systems programmer. So my first job was asa systems programmer, right along the computer science thing.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Had you been doing some programming in school?Winblad: Oh yes, only as classes, but not ever commercially or professionally, so I wasa novice.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that a stretch?Winblad: No.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Nothing’s a stretch, is it? [laughing]Winblad: My job today is a stretch. Being a venture capitalist is a stretch. The job at theFederal Reserve Bank was a well-defined job. I had to learn quickly on thejob. That was the expectation that was given to me, and I did a pretty good jobat that. I resigned from that position thirteen months later because it was not going to be, in my view, over my career, a stretch job. And that’s when Istarted my own software company [Open Systems, Inc.]. But my job today is a stretch. I’m in the business of new. My job is not reallyto predict the future but to find the future, so anything I invest in is unknown.It has only assumptions, not facts. I invest at the highest risk point, at theearliest stage of software companies. I invest in high-risk individuals,entrepreneurs. Most of them have never done their jobs before, just like I hadnever done mine. And we don’t yet know until we actually start building thesecompanies whether the assumptions we make about building great value forlarge markets are valid. So everything I do is a stretch every day! [laughing]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Yes, and you love it, I bet.Winblad: I do. I love it. It’s painful when it’s unsuccessful. That’s why we’re calledventure capitalists, versus just capitalists. It’s joyous and surprising when it issuccessful.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So early on you knew that you wanted a job that was going to stretch you. Iimagine that the Federal Reserve was looked upon by most people as a prettygood career.Winblad: Oh, yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And particularly at your young age. What were you—twenty-one?Winblad: I was, and for me it was really a big career move because they had never hireda right-out-of college student at the grade level that they had hired me. I wasable to get my master’s degree [in Education with a focus in Economics]during that thirteen months in an executive program at St. Thomas. So at thatpoint in time I would have been the only woman in the Federal Reserve Bankof Minneapolis with a master’s degree. There weren’t a lot of women thereeither. So there would have been an opportunity for me, even on the diversitycard, to surge up to heights that I was totally unqualified for and to earn theright to have those jobs. People often ask me: are entrepreneurs made or born? And I think I was madeto be an entrepreneur. I didn’t say look, I want to start a software companybecause I want to be an entrepreneur. I just said I want to start a softwarecompany because I love software, and I want out of here. [laughter] So I saidokay, I really like one thing. The reason I want out of here is not that they’renot paying me well, not that I still have to pay off my student loans, not thatthere’s not a great career path for me, not that my family is already incredibly proud of me—but it’s not joyous. And so what is joyous for me? The conceptthat I would write software with a group of people, and we would turn it intoproducts and actually sell them—that felt like it could be really joyous.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You left the Federal Reserve with that in mind?Winblad: Yes, because I convinced two guys to take a sabbatical for a year to join asvendors, and one guy quit with me. And so the three gentlemen and I startedthe company.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And they were at the Federal Reserve?Winblad: Yes. They knew what they were doing. They actually had programmingexperience. At thirteen months of actually writing code, I was still quite anovice. [laughing]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, tell me how the company emerged.Winblad: We basically had to find some revenue, because I had to pay off those studentloans. We had to find a contract to deliver on, so we responded to a request forproposal for an accounting system for schools. That we got. So we did thatduring the day, and we said what kind of code are we going to write? Becausethere were these new PCs coming out. And I said, “Hey! Why don’t we justprogram my accounting textbook from college?” So we took out my Pyle andWhite textbook, and we said, let’s write software that does accounting, orwhat would be called ERP [enterprise resource planning] systems. So westarted on page one—not that any of us were experts in accounting—and westarted writing in a couple different languages, one for PCs and one for midrange computing accounting systems.By the way, my accounting textbook was a used textbook, because I couldn’tafford new textbooks. I always detested textbooks where there washighlighting in them, because I didn’t really understand highlighting. I couldnever find an accounting textbook that wasn’t highlighted, so we had to takeout that dreadful Pyle and White textbook, which I still have today, which hadall this yellow highlighting and dog-ears on it, and that became the softwarethat we wrote.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was anybody doing anything like this in accounting? Winblad: Well, we didn’t know. You have to remember now we’re pretty much inalmost 1976 when we start the company, so we started this company the sameyear Microsoft started. Microsoft started in ‘75, Apple in ‘76, Oracle in ‘77.It’s not like we have Facebook to talk to each other or even e-mail. Soanybody starting a software company at this time doesn’t know anybody else.It’s all spontaneous combustion. Microsoft’s in Albuquerque. There’s acompany out here [in California] called Digital Research in Monterey. There’ssome stuff happening out here but it’s mostly hardware, and we startedcoming out here to meet the hardware vendors. But nobody’s saying, hey,let’s all come to a conference and figure out what software we should write.We’re just all on our own, thinking it’s our own brilliant idea. It’s soridiculous how it all worked. And in fact there were hundreds of companiesbeing started at that time. And it was who happened to make the right choicesfor the right languages, the right operating systems, and the right machines,and the right route to market that made any money or even survived.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: How do you explain this spontaneous generation? Is it that it trite to say thatthe technology was ready? But then you have to have the human mind that cantake it somewhere.Winblad: Yes, and one thing I will remind you of in that period of 1975-1976 isunemployment was 11 percent in Minnesota. And this period was followed byinflation, if you remember, gas lines.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Right, the Arab oil crisis.Winblad: I remember I had a little red Opel, and I had to sit in those gas lines. So themacro environment was not saying, hey, quit your jobs and start companies.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And the stock market was not doing well in those years.Winblad: Yes, but none of us owned any stocks, so we didn’t notice. [laughter]I had a little passbook from Midwest Federal, a little paper book that I had torip out a page every month and mail in a check. That’s all I knew, thatMidwest Federal was getting a check from me every month for my studentloans. It had a little green tree on it, and I would stare at that green tree andgo—what does that green tree mean? It just means that I have to earn thismuch money, at least, every month. Well, what it does mean is that innovationis not on a curve, that it’s a step function. And every once in a while,especially in the software industry, the dynamics of innovation come together.In this case, it was the beginning of the PC era. Nobody tells you it’s coming.  You’ve heard the stories of Bill [Gates] and Paul Allen reading about themicroprocessor. One of the rules that we had is we’re not going to writesoftware for any computer we have to assemble, because I don’t know how touse a soldering iron, me personally. I can’t imagine people soldering thesethings together. So we skipped a whole bunch of machines that people weretrying to write software for, and we said only until it gets fully assembled.Those are the machines we’ll program for. That seemed like a ridiculouschoice, but people were racing to program for the Commodore PET and thingsthat people had to assemble.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And in the end wasting their time.Winblad: Right, and also building software that was pretty small and really wasn’tusable for businesses. We also said, look, we’re not going to program forindividuals because we are going to program for businesses—because who’sgoing to run accounting systems? So some of our early novice rules—okay, what are our rules of engagement?It gives you a great insight into entrepreneurs. Markets are new, they’re fresh,the lenses some of these entrepreneurs use are lenses for survival, and they’regood lenses. Some of the choices they make are not based on McKinsey’sstrategic assumptions. They’re just based on okay, we’re going to have tomake some decisions, and we’re going to have to make them quickly, andwe’re going to make them now. The main thing that we ask entrepreneurs is, “What are your assumptions?How did you make them? Do you have an assumption set? Are you justwinging it?” And my competitors who winged it were weaving all over,because the noise level as the PC market picked up was unbelievable! Therewas a new language, new environment, new machine every month after thisthing got going. And without a core assumption set people were running allover the place. So for us, we had to wait for these step functions of innovation, and I wasfortunate to pick one of those to start a company. Our company did not needventure capital, which was good because there was no venture capital forsoftware companies at that time. By the mid-seventies, Sequoia [Capital] andKleiner Perkins are three- and four-year-old companies. The good news forme is one of the first hardware companies we picked to program on wasfunded by Sequoia Capital.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that Don Valentine? Winblad: It was. It was a company called CADO Systems, and we programmed for thatcomputer. Little did I know that we should have made an assumption to onlyprogram for hardware companies that had venture funding—the others will goout of business—but I didn’t know enough about venture capital to pick that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Looking back, do you think that you had any disadvantage geographically inbeing in the Midwest?Winblad: Not at that time, and we were cognizant of that. We worked very early on withNovell and the Novell operating system, and they flew their programmersfrom Utah to Minneapolis, so they were geographically constrained. But wedidn’t try to find our market locally. That was never available to us. We neverhad a local hardware vendor to pick, so we had to get on airplanes early, andwe decided we wanted to be part of the software industry, not just a localsoftware company. So we set out goals high, and for the most part theyworked.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Were you doing most of this goal setting? How were you working with yourpartners? There were four of you at the head of the show at Open Systems?Winblad: Yes. One of the co-founders, who was a really great programmer, TimDickinson, a really great strategic thinker, was always thinking about thebroader assumption set, and that’s how people program. It’s an if-then world.The other two were great partners but were not as great strategic thinkers.None of them wanted to do the fly to California and get a big deal done orwhatever—they wanted to build product. So it all worked out. We hired acorporate psychologist early on.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, you’re kidding!Winblad: This was just a collegiate thing, because I had business psychology—doesn’teverybody do this? Just assess our strengths and weaknesses, and how wewould best work together, and how we would add employees. For our firstfifty employees, we had this corporate psychologist interview them. So no oneever quit. That was a bad thing. We did such a good job in hiring thateverybody fit, at least the first fifty. So we said well, maybe we’ve got toshake it up a little. We did a lot of things very thoughtfully, some probablyoverthoughtfully, but that was one of them.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And then time goes on and you sell the company in 1982. Winblad: I actually sell the company at the end of 1984. And if I remember right,almost at the end of ’84, I move out here, because I made a commitment tostay at the company until someone else was hired to run it.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Why did you sell Open Systems?Winblad: We kept getting offers, and we brought back in the psychologist and said,“Well, okay, we’re going to have to make this really big or sell it. Who’s infor making it real big?” It turned out that only I was up for the task or willingfor the task [to enlarge the company]. Everybody else said, “This is fine. Thisis a lot of money for each individual.” And by the way, two of the foundersnever worked after that.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And of course that never occurred to you, did it? [laughing]Winblad: No!<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I could have predicted.Winblad: One of them did, and one of them just decided to manage his little nest egg,and the other person set up a little theater company in Wisconsin and movedthere. So this just blew me away, but it told me it was the right decision,because all four of us were fundamental to going forward. It’s like, are we upto doubling again or not? So it worked out well for all of us.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, before we leave the Midwest, let’s bring in Bill Gates. I’m picturing thatall these very bright groups competing in the PC market are very independent.Winblad: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So how did you meet Bill Gates?Winblad: Well, I’d been to Microsoft a few times, and I had met Paul and a number ofother people. When Microsoft was considering a strong foray into the Unixoperating system, we were the largest Unix software vendor. Now peopletoday would refer to it as Linux in its next generation. So we ran all of oursoftware on Unix for mid-range companies, and Microsoft was decidingwhether they would stay with their version of Unix called Xenix. So weworked very closely with Microsoft, but I had never met Bill. I never thought,gee, I need to meet Bill Gates. [laughter] I was kind of busy. Winblad: So I was a speaker at a conference in 1983. And yes, you’re right—I had soldmy company at the end of ’82. So I’d just sold my company, because this wasFebruary of ‘83, and Bill was a speaker as well at Esther Dyson’s conference.At that point in time, what happened is, with so few women in the industry, itwas almost national news: woman does something in software industry.Nobody actually cared what. By the way, I was one of the first companies to get liquidity in this earlysoftware era. Microsoft was not yet public and would not be public till ‘85.Remember, Microsoft in ‘84 was just finishing a year of $75 million inrevenue, so we’re talking small numbers here of everything, especiallyrelative to today. Facebook files with $3.7 billion in revenue. So people don’trealize how nascent and small the software industry was. We were thesixteenth largest software company in the world. So no software company hadhad $100 million in revenue and would not for a couple years. So we were allout there with picks and shovels, plowing down.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It seems to me that at the time for most people in finance software is off theradar screen. Does that explain why venture capital wasn’t really paying muchattention to what was happening in software?Winblad: Well, basically at this point in time it has been called Silicon Valley for awhile. You’ve talked to the founders of venture capital here, and these aresemiconductor guys and systems guys. For all of our software, we’re not yetselling it separate from the hardware, even though it came in its own boxes.People would buy a piece of hardware and buy our software with it. We soldthrough Don Valentine’s company, CADO, the CADO Systems dealernetwork. And the dealer sold our software every time they sold hardware. Itwas not on the machines, but they would install it with the machines. Therewas not yet an aftermarket. That would not really happen until we got furtherinto the launch of the IBM personal computer, and there were enoughinstalled machines that people would buy it for one thing and then buy moresoftware for it. See, the install base was small, so we were still building thesupply chain for software. Software was pretty rudimentary. We would haveto jig around with the operating system, so it was a good thing that I was asystems programmer at one time in my life.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You needed it.Winblad: We did, we actually did. The three guys that were the co-founders were truesystems programmers, and without that knowledge we couldn’t have writtencode this early on that actually worked and delivered value to customers.  So back to the question of Bill. I was one of the stars of the show of thatparticular conference, because everybody was asking, well gee, people paidyou real money for this company? And you’re now a multimillionairesoftware girl? And who the hell are you? Where did you come from?[laughing] Where is Minnesota—is that Minneapolis or Minndeanapolis?Where is that place? And you went to St. Thomas—is that in the Bahamas? Iremember Bill Gates said, “I read your bio—there’s a lot of saints in that bio.”One of the first questions that Bill asked me, he goes, “What were your SATscores?” Of course I did know what they were, but they weren’t quite as highas his, but they were impressive enough for him. And I go well, here’s whatthey were. So Bill and I became good friends. We had a lot in common,including a lot of passion for our industry. We are both avid readers, not justabout technology but other things. He’s a great jokester, so we became goodfriends, and it was at that conference that we met each other and have beenreally good friends since.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Did you learn from him and he learned from you in running a business or justin leading your lives?Winblad: Well, clearly, Bill is a natural teacher. He loves communicating what he’slearned to others. And he’s not at rest unless he’s learned something. He isvoracious in learning. Even today he’s constantly— He really loves onlinelearning now, so he’s watching all these online lectures on topics all over theplace, so he’s constantly sending me an online lecture and saying, “This is thebest online lecture on geophysics. You’ll really love this. Watch it during yourworkout.”The thing that I learned most from Bill at the macro level is that I alwaysthink, especially to be a venture capitalist, that you have to be interested inknowing something new. [indicating with hand] My bar was here; Bill’s barwas here [raising arm to a higher level]. Whenever I feel like I’m getting alittle lazy, and I’m not really a good student of what’s going on, I think, oh mygosh, what is Bill learning right now?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I’ve got to hurry up and catch up.Winblad: Yes, because my table stakes are not as strong as his. So Bill, from the day ofmeeting him, was an inspiration to me to dig in on the intellectual staminalevel. And there is a lot of fun in really turning the crank on intellectualstamina. It takes a lot of physical stamina to be an entrepreneur because it’shard work, but it takes tremendous intellectual stamina to be successful. Andwhen you slack off on that, you lose curiosity about things, curiosity aboutpeople. You lose your ability to parse how new things work. So that was my learning from Bill, and I hope that I am a voracious enough student that I pushhis intellectual stamina a little bit.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But how in heaven’s name do you find time? I just looked at the number ofboards that you sit on. And that, for most ordinary people, would be quiteenough to occupy oneself. And then having to switch your attention from oneset of problems to another set of problems and keeping it straight and notlosing focus. I would think you’d get exhausted!Winblad: You have to be a very good multitasker, and you have to be good at focusingyour attention in the moment. You also cannot be a worrier to be a venturecapitalist, and you have to lean forward. Yesterday’s mistakes are yesterday’smistakes and tomorrow’s learning. Anyone who’s a handwringer should neverapproach the career path of venture capital. Anyone who needs to selfflagellate themselves more than five minutes and if you can’t figure out howmistakes turns into learning, pick another profession. One of the great gifts of meeting Bill was to meet Bill’s mother, Mary Gates.Mary unfortunately passed away before her sixty-fifth birthday, but Mary tooka strong interest in me. And Mary was an amazing person. She clearly was agreat mother because she has three great children; a great wife; she had a greatand loving husband. Mary herself was active in the schools, on the board ofthe University of Washington, on multiple other boards. Whenever you wouldmeet Mary, you got a handwritten thank-you note. And she always looked puttogether, she never looked tired, she always was present in the moment. I saidto her, thirty years ago, “Mary, how do you find time for all this?” At thispoint in time, I am a relatively young venture capitalist, I’m not on that manyboards, I haven’t yet joined my university board, I haven’t joined a nonprofitboard yet. She said, “You know Ann, it’s amazing how much time you reallyhave, and how much time you waste, and how much time you can find forothers, how much time you can find to sit down quietly and thank others, howmuch time you can find for kindness, let alone how much time you can findfor contributing your own intellectual capital as well as your financial capital.As you get older you’ll find that you actually get even better at that.” And thatwas a real inspiration to me, to say, hey, it’s not about how fast you pedal, it’sabout how clearly you focus.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: California. Was that an obvious next step?Winblad: You know, it’s so long ago that people ask me why I did things and I forgetthe why. I just did them. Yes, it was. One of the benefits I got from being oneof the pioneers in the PC software industry is I met a lot of people just likeme, my age, fun, smart, and they became my friends as well because I spentso much time with them, so much time building this company. And they weren’t in Minnesota, and there was not a budding software industry there,and my passion for software just grew stronger and not weaker. I thought, Ican have distant friendships and find something else to do here in the TwinCities, which is a wonderful place, and I love the Twin Cities dearly and dostill spend time there. Or I can move out here. And I moved out here.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: What were your parents saying, losing their eldest and probably mostsuccessful—Winblad: My entire family was pretty excited, because they knew that I had discoveredwinter was optional, could afford to take the option, and they could visit me insomeplace warm for the six months of the year when they were all living inigloos. So there was joy in the Minnesota family that I had actually taken thisstep.A lot of people interviewed my dad because he was well known in Minnesota.He was in the Minnesota Athletic Hall of Fame. How did he feel about myaccomplishments at that time when I was being interviewed. And he goes,“Look, all my children are fantastic.” He just was really great about that.“They’re all worth millions to me.”<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Before we get into what you actually did when you arrived, please talk aboutthe storied Silicon Valley culture, maybe in comparison to what you hadexperienced in the Minneapolis area.Winblad: Well, I knew very little about venture capital. I knew one venture capitalist,Don Valentine, a very unique, skilled, focused individual, from my interactionwith CADO Systems Corporation, which was a very good interaction. So thisis a good segue into what I did in California and my true understanding ofSilicon Valley. I didn’t really think about it as I’m going to Silicon Valley.But it was Silicon Valley.One of my customers at Open Systems was Altos Computers, and I had todrive out to the apple orchards where Altos was in San Jose. In fact, whenthey first built their first computers they shipped them in fake fruit crates, so itwas much more like the apple orchards that you people talk about. When I got out here—I had purchased a flat in San Francisco—I went to thelittle neighborhood grocery store, and the grocer said, “Ann, it’s so great tomeet you.” I said, “Wow, what a friendly city! The grocer already knowsme.” Little did I know that I was already in the Sunday magazine as one of thenew Silicon Valley entrepreneurs. I was a little late that day to buy the Sundaypaper, so I was recognizable by my photo. I started getting calls from venture capitalists, and they said, “Look, weinvested in this software company, and it’s not working well. Can you take alook at it?” And I go, “You know, I just got here. And in fact my furniture andclothes are not even here because the truck broke down in the Grand Canyon.So could I be here for a couple of weeks before I start looking at brokensoftware companies?” I had agreed to do a project for Price Waterhouse, which they had called meabout, to work as a consultant on their technology forecast across all thetechnologies. That seemed to be a good thing to do as a warm-up project,because I knew one thing—it wasn’t like I was the princess of software here. Iworked thirteen months at the Federal Reserve Bank, six years in my ownlittle software company, building PC software, mid-market ERP (accounting)software for businesses—that’s it. I knew a lot of people in the PC softwareindustry, because by this time we knew each other because we were at thesame conferences. I probably knew a bit about operating systems, lots aboutbusiness software, but not much more. I knew about mainframes; I actuallyknew about minicomputers. So Price Waterhouse wanted me to help put theforecast together. That gave me an opportunity to interview the technologyleaders in every single technology segment, from systems to semiconductorsto operating systems—every kind of software that was being built. I thought,I’ll interview them, I’ll put a team together to help build this worldwidetechnology forecast, and that was fantastic. So I didn’t have a lot of time.I’d also agreed to write this textbook on object-oriented software. [Ann L.Winblad, David R. King, & Samuel D. Edwards, Object-Oriented Software.Addison-Wesley, 1990.] By this time I was kind of well known, and I thoughtokay, I’ll write a book. How hard can that be?<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Price Waterhouse wanted you to do that? Or you just saw a need?Winblad: No, Addison-Wesley had called, another friend had called me to do that. AndI said, “Oh, that sounds easy.” That was hard, too. So that was lined up for thenear future.It’s ‘85, and I’m lined up for ‘85 on all these projects. I actually hoped I couldtake a couple vacations here. [laughter]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I would think!Winblad: So these venture capitalists kept calling me, and I kept going to visit thesecompanies, and that was really tiring, and I stopped doing that. Anotherventure capitalist called up and said, “Look, you really don’t understand howSilicon Valley works. Venture capitalists are important. If you ever want to start a company— The PC software companies had all been formed; weweren’t yet in the next step function of innovation, so it was a good time forme to do these projects, and I’d overcommitted myself. “So you really shouldbuild some chits here, Ann, because if you start a software company you’regoing to want money this time around.” Well, at least he was honest with me. So I started going to see these software companies again, and that’s where Iactually met John Hummer. I’d looked at one of these companies and hadbrought to the board how they might turn it around, what actually thesymptoms they were seeing, what the problems really were. There were very,very few skills in really understanding how to put one of these softwarecompanies together, because there were very few that got to scale. Thosepeople were busy; they weren’t selling off their companies in droves like Iwas. So John started stalking me and said, “Look, I want to start a venturecapital firm focused on software.” And I said, “You know, these venturecapitalists don’t seem to know a lot about software. Why would I want to beone of them? I’m going to start another software company.” I was waitingaround for some new technologies to come into play, and I’d looked at thingslike artificial intelligence and done some work with a couple companies therebut that looked really hard. I spent a bunch of time at Stanford looking atartificial intelligence. I’d looked at where is this Unix operating system goingto go? I did a project for Microsoft there, and Unix hadn’t come to fruition yetbecause one thing was missing. Oracle was still toiling away on server-baseddatabases, and client-server computing had not yet started. So we were on theremnants of the PC era and not quite there. So John was starting to win theargument. So in early ’87 we said okay, let’s start forming this thing, a venture capitalpartnership. Well, again, just as we start forming it, if you remember whathappens at that time, the disk drive industry collapses, the semiconductorindustry collapses, there’s massive unemployment in Silicon Valley—great!Perfect time for me to change jobs again! [laughter] So we got our pitchtogether; we practiced our pitch. John neglected to tell me that no one hasraised a new venture capital fund for five years. Everyone has abandoned theasset class; there were no new funds. We go out there and start meeting withpeople. We have 133 meetings—everybody says no. They said, “No, we’renot funding venture capital firms, and why would we fund a software firm?The assets walk out the door at night. That’s the stupidest thing we’ve everheard.” We go back to the drawing board—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: The programmers are leaving?Winblad: Yes, because there’s no hard assets. We’re doing poorly in the semiconductorthing, why would we pick this group of venture capitalists? So we go back,and we have to come up with a trick pony. So we go back to Don Valentine, Pitch Johnson, and Bill Edwards, who are all venture capitalists at the time,and we say, “Can you help us?” And they agree. We have to go to theirrespective firms and pitch this idea that they’ll each put a half a million dollarsinto our firm, and then we can go out again and say that Pitch Johnson, BillEdwards, and Don Valentine are supporters of our fund.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, that’s a big plus.Winblad: It was a huge plus, and it was the seminal thing. We went back to St. Paul, andwe pitched to two firms there, St. Paul Insurance and 3M Corporation, andthey both said yes. They both said yes on the combination of, I think, thecommitment of the hometown girl and the experience of John who’d been aventure capitalist for a few years. But the endorsement of Pitch, John, and Billwas seminal to me becoming a venture capitalist and the creation of HummerWinblad Venture Partners.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That was the 134th pitch that did it?Winblad: [laughter] It was. But I will say one thing—I think it was Pasteur that said,“Luck benefits the prepared mind.” And there really is no such thing as luck.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Not just chance. Yes, you were lucky, but there was more to it than that,obviously. Talk about John Hummer a bit, please.Winblad: So you’ve asked me about John Hummer. Well, John is a very uniqueindividual himself. His pedigree is much more like most of the venturecapitalists here in Silicon Valley. He went to Princeton undergrad andStanford for his MBA. One thing John did differently is in between Princetonand Stanford he played six years in the National Basketball Association. Johnwas a first-round draft pick out of Princeton, played for the SeattleSupersonics, and was a noted center there. John is six ten. He’s the tallestventure capitalist. I’m five two and three-quarters—I probably am theshortest. [laughter] So we were memorable when we were fundraising.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I guess!Winblad: I talked over my career decision with my dad and told him that I was going tobe a venture capitalist. My mom and dad had no clue what a venture capitalistwas. They’d just figured out what software was. But they didn’t care. The ideafor my dad that I would actually partner up with an ex-professional basketball 20player was his dream come true. I brought John home to meet my parents.You know, he’s a pretty big guy, so my mom cooked enough food for tenpeople, and my dad polished up all of his high school medals. He lettered inbasketball, football, and baseball in college. He shined up all his trophies fromcollege, all his medals from his high school tournaments, and they were alllaid out on our dining room table. My dad was so excited to meet JohnHummer. I actually didn’t think about that when John had approached me, butmy dad was, as we would say in Minnesota, tickled pink and so proud to beassociated with John as much as he was proud of his own daughter.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Nice story. You’ve said that John had been a venture capitalist for a few years.Winblad: Yes.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You’d been watching venture capital, and you’d been receiving phone callsfrom venture capitalists. But I’m still imagining that the jump from being anentrepreneur to venture capitalist required acquiring new knowledge.Winblad: Well, there’s a technology to venture capital. How do you actually construct afund? And we got some good help there because you don’t know how to dothat. And then how do you construct term sheets, what actually makes for agood financing, what makes for a bad financing? Not how you build acompany, but how do you construct the capital framework so it works forscaling for you and for the company and for the entrepreneurs? And John hadbeen well mentored there and brought that to the table. You don’t learn that inschool; you get some classes on it, but you don’t really learn it. I had beenrunning a company, and then I had now spent some time consultingcompanies at a larger scale but still relatively small like Microsoft, or reallybig ones like Price Waterhouse or IBM, and small ones when I was looking atones that I might join or I might run or whatever. So it turned out that it was actually good that there had been a period of timebetween the time I was running a company to my role as a consultant, where Iwas coaching. You make a change from a player to a coach. Realistically,once you fully make that change you can’t go back. The hardest change for ayoung venture capitalist is you actually do have a lot more experience ifyou’ve been in the same industry and running companies than the first-timeCEO you fund. You have to learn how to teach, not tell; [learn] when it isimportant to grab the CEO from jumping off a cliff versus having themunderstand what the edge of a cliff looks like. There are a lot of skills inplaying the supporting cast role and the board member role. There’s a lot oflearning how to help build the boards, how to select your co-investors, how tofigure out what is your role on the board, so that you get the maximum value not just from yourself but from others, not just the entrepreneurs but the boardmembers themselves. And I was not fully learned on all those things. Interestingly enough, one of the first deals we did, we offered that deal,Control Point Software up to Sequoia [Capital] as a co-lead, and Don[Valentine] was on the board with me. That was quite a learning experiencefor me in learning both things to do and not to do. One of the next deals wedid was with a younger partner, Doug Leone, at Sequoia, where we bothlearned together, and that was really helpful for us both. But there is a learningcurve. We were fortunate that another thing happened when we started our fund.Because it took us so long to get the fund funded, guess what? We were at oneof these innovation step functions, exactly at the point of the launch of clientserver computing. So we cleaned up. We founded a company called Arbor[Software] which became Hyperion, a two-person startup, [which] was thecreator of business intelligence; a company called Powersoft, which becamethe leading development tool company for distributed databases that Larry[Ellison] at Oracle had now brought to market; a company called Scopus[Technology], the first CRM [customer relationship management] system. Sowe funded sixteen companies—half of them went public. So our first fund,which was only $35 million, was a grand success. And again, timing, which iseverything, was very beneficial to us. So the amount of time it took us to havethose hundreds of meetings to get our first $35 million turned out to be ablessing to us, because this put us smack on the beginning of an innovationstep function.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: So you’re right. There is an element of luck, isn’t there?Winblad: There is, there is.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I know you had one failure in that initial fund—Slate. Do you want to talkabout that?Winblad: Oh yes. Unfortunately, we had, I think, three companies out of the sixteenwhich were not grand successes. The one that was not a success for me was aKleiner Perkins [Caufield & Byers] deal that we did, called Slate. We fundedsome very notable people, including Tom Byers, who was professor of theyear the year before last at Stanford. Tom is in the engineering department atStanford and is a renowned professor worldwide, and he teachesentrepreneurship around the world from the vantage point of the engineeringschool. In fact, I think he’s in Abu Dhabi teaching that today. Tom had neverrun a company before, and Kleiner Perkins, where his brother was— <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Oh, Brook Byers.Winblad: —and Vern Raburn of Lotus and Microsoft fame at the time, and Dottie Hall,ex-Microsoft. We built the first software for tablets. Not in anyone’s memoryin the time was that in the early 1990s [these] were the first tablets that cameout. Everybody had one. They were huge failures. I still have five in mycloset. I think I should give them to the Computer History Museum if theydon’t have them.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: You should!Winblad: The company did extremely well in building the products, extremely well ingetting distribution on all these tablets. But guess what, nobody bought thetablets. So our assumption about the quality of the team turned out to be fact.Their ability to build the software—fact. Their ability to find a route to thecustomer—fact. The assumption that customers in droves would buy tablets—not fact. So we lost—<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was it just an assumption? Had they done any testing of the waters to see howthe tablet might fly?Winblad: Well, when you do early-stage investing, there’s no waters to test. The wavesare under the surface. We have to fund the waves before they break on thesurface, so we have to fund the companies just as we see technologies comingtogether. Sometimes they don’t come together. One of the companies that we funded early that turned out to be a greatsuccess was Wind River, now the ARM division of Intel. And it was acompany that I found at the Embedded Systems Conference. So they builtsoftware for printers that have embedded software in them, and other devices.We were almost too early there. There were sixteen companies that had a tinybit of revenue, and we guessed wrong about the velocity of the embeddedsystems market, but we guessed right about this particular company to own itall. So they started defeating any other incumbents. So the aggregation of allthe marketplaces there built a big enough company, called Wind River, for usto take public.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Was that because they had technological advantages in their product? Whywere they ahead of the crowd?Winblad: I think the investors helped them, us as investors and co-investors, as to whatit was to own a marketplace versus just to build the best software; how to really build a high-growth business around the best technology versus alwayscompeting just with the technology; not just winning deals but owning acustomer base; and owning not just a customer base but becoming number onein the marketplace. Now there was enough of a market to do it there. In the case of Slate, there was not. [laughing] And we lost, I think, a millionand change, so it wasn’t what I’ll call a big loss. But you don’t want to win inall your first companies, otherwise it means you’re being overselective.You’re not taking enough risk; you’re not pushing into where things mightcome together. And of course, Dottie and Vern and Tom all went on to greatcareers. Kleiner Perkins is still in business. We were able to co-lead that dealwith the top venture capitalists of the day. They’d been around since ‘73; we’dbeen around for two years.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: That was a pretty good advertisement right there, wasn’t it?Winblad: Yes, but again, it was not that we said, gee, we’ll do this because KleinerPerkins is doing it. Our judgment at the time was there was going to be a bigmarket opportunity, and our judgment was wrong. By the way, it was wrongby twenty-five years. [laughter] But if we’d done it today, it would be reallyright. And interestingly enough, Slate built little apps, so everything they didwas right.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It was just before the time.Winblad: When I look at the thing you have to laugh. So again, our job is not to predictthe future, our job is to find it. But to find it at the right time. And nolaughing.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Talk about how much you actually participate in the management of acompany. How hands-on are you?Winblad: Well, we are hands-on in helping build the management team. The focus ofour firm is still 100 percent software, and our focus today is investing in theearly stage, meaning we are usually the first venture investor in thesecompanies. Typically, there’s two to ten people, and more often than not it’scloser to two than ten. So we play a very important role, both for the foundersand for the company, in helping recruit and build the management team. Italked earlier about how no one helped me, but we hired a psychologist.[laughing] Even then it was important for us to build the right team and reallyunderstand our own strengths and weaknesses so that we could build the rightteam. The CEO reports to the board, so we play an important role indetermining if the CEO is doing a good-enough job. We cannot run the company. And in fact if we feel that we are diving in and telling the companywhat to do, occasionally we have—not occasionally—we are asked to giveour recommendation, and we give firm opinions. But if we find ourselvesrunning the company, that means that company is broken or we’re broken.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Are you unusual in that?Winblad: No. I think all good venture capitalists will tell you, if they believe that theboard is running the company, it’s either time to sell that company or time toget a new CEO. Something’s fundamentally broken, either on boarddynamics, the CEO themselves, or the company.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: But it’s a very delicate relationship, isn’t it? Knowing how much tointerfere—or advise. I shouldn’t use a prejudiced word.Winblad: We bring independent board members on that might be experienced CEOs ifwe have a first-time CEO. We do really understand that the CEO may have areal bonded experience with some of the board members and not others,where they might see not all board members as career mentors for them. Thatis fine as long as the mentors they pick are good ones. Sometimes it’s hard forboard members to adjust to the fact that they’re not the chosen mentor. To me,you have to look at the bigger picture and the role of the cooperative, not yourindividual role. We’re judged in the harsh reality of returns. Do we build goodcompanies that have liquidity paths? And those liquidity paths can be multipleones. Zero-sum multiples are homeruns. It’s sometimes hard in doing your jobevery day, especially when you’re a young venture capitalist, to keep your eyeon what your ball is. We have to help build companies. It’s not about yourvanity; it’s not about you feeling like you’re the smartest person in the room.It’s about where can you pitch in to add value to build long-term, sustainable,competitive advantage and value for this company. That’s it.I think the entrepreneurs have gotten the message from us that they need tochoose carefully and find good chemistry in choosing a CEO. Even in ourfirm sometimes entrepreneurs I meet I think the chemistry would be betterwith one of my other partners. So even there we really judge that as this[startup] is a great fit for our firm and something we want to invest in—who’sthe right partner here to shepherd it? And that again is something you have tolook for. We are equal partners here, so it makes it easy for us to do that. Ithink something important for entrepreneurs is they want to make sure thatthey’re getting the whole [venture capital] firm not just the partner. They wantto be able to trust their partners as confidants and build that relationship overtime. Mostly they want to maximize our value. They want to maximize myRolodex, my reach into the industry, the fact that we spend most of our timein the software industry versus in venture capital land. How would they leverage that? How can they leverage our other portfolio companies? So Ithink entrepreneurs are more sophisticated in really looking at the venturecapital relationship that they pick, and hopefully many of them get choices.And we’re hopeful that good ones choose us.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Very, very interesting. You listen to an entrepreneur’s presentation, and isthere a list of things that you’re ticking off in your mind about what you’relooking for to make this proposal a go? And is it pretty much the same list forany proposal? Or does it change with the proposal?Winblad: There is sort of a standard pitch in what you want to communicate to a venturecapitalist, but there’s not a standard entrepreneur. You’re first looking for theability of the founders to communicate their idea. Even if you don’t really likethe idea, are they great communicators? And they have to be, because they’regoing to have to raise money, recruit employees, sell software, communicateto analysts and the industry at large why they’re a big company. So if they’renot a good communicator, it’s a little hard for us. People have differentcommunication skills. A technical communicator might be less salesy than aperson who comes out of the sales ranks, and that’s fine. We’re not expectingeverybody to be an infomercial. But we’re expecting them to be passionatecommunicators. We’re also expecting them to have a strong sense of a big opportunity and beable to communicate that while diving down on their product. Unfortunately,we see a lot of really, really great product pitches. And we can’t fundproducts. We have to fund companies. So there’s a lot of pattern matching thatgoes on. At best we’re pattern matching—does this fit the pattern of a winner?[laughing] Does this look like somebody that is a first-round draft pick? WhenI was a young venture capitalist, I would say, “Would I go work there?” I askour young partner to think about that himself—would you go work there? Ifyou had to quit your job, would you think about working there? Does it seembig enough and interesting enough? It’s hard for me to ask that to myself rightnow, because I know I’m not going to quit this job and go work at a softwarecompany.[I ask myself:] What sense do I have of the competitive environment? Hownew is this? How breakthrough is it? Do I like it? Would I like to work withthis team? Because I’m going to work with them for five or six years. So all ofthose dynamics come in. Are my partners getting the same kind of mojo goingabout this? There’s a lot of pattern chemistry that comes into play. It’s not justtheir mouths are moving up there, and we don’t care what words come out,but there is some of that. And they have to be able to communicate scale.Even if we find, wow, that’s not going to be that big, we’d rather reel you in alittle bit than try to push you out to the opportunity. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Are all the partners there when something’s being pitched?Winblad: We’re all there when it’s being pitched.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And then you get your heads together afterwards and decide whether it’s a go?Winblad: Yes, and we have to achieve what we call a venture consensus, which meansthere are not strong naysayers and hopefully there are strong yeasayers.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: If there is a strong naysayer, can that kill the deal?Winblad: We’ll think twice about it, and it will likely kill the deal because we’reworried about our own lens, and we also know that companies aren’t perfect.We’ve now committed to spin straw into gold. That is a fairy tale, but we haveto do that. Along the way the spinning wheel breaks—you don’t want that onepartner coming in and saying, I told you so. Even if they don’t do that, youcan hear it coming. [laughter] So you want everybody to say, well, that was alittle bump in the road, or we’re going to have to slightly help this companychange course. You want everybody to grab an oar and to say yes, we allrooted for this company. Let’s keep going.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: It must be exciting.Winblad: On most days it is. Sometimes it’s a different kind of excitement than youwant. [laughter] One thing to remember about software is the intellectualcapital trumps the financial capital all the time, so what happens when theintellectual capital is the most important; psychodrama? [singing] So there’s alot of stuff that happens there. The course I loved in school was business psychology. I remember we wereall being filmed, and we were given different roles. I got the card sayingyou’re going to get fired, and you’re going to cry. I was the only woman in theclass, and so the guys would tromp in one by one, and they would fire me, andI would burst into tears, and they would completely lose it and forget exactlywhat they were going to do. They even forgot that they were in class becausethey just couldn’t handle this. I remember how hard it was for them to fire me,because I said things like, “My livelihood depends on this. I have a family.”Well, I’ve had to go through that script many times [since]. And it is not easy.It is really hard to abstract yourself from the people that you’ve spent timewith. So the people skill things are something that— We are mostly nerds inthis industry. We’re nerdulent and tough businesspeople, and every day we have to work on are our nurturing skills, not our nerdulent skills, and reallyhelping really, really skilled people do their really hard jobs.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Really demanding stuff, isn’t it?Winblad: It’s much less demanding being the venture capitalist than the entrepreneur.And that is something that is really important to remember. I’m really gladthat I was an entrepreneur myself, so I know that my job now is so mucheasier.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Is that because the entrepreneur’s whole stake is in this company that eitherhas to make it or not?Winblad: It could be that. They may have already made a ton of money. But they’remaking really hard decisions every day. The hours that these entrepreneurswork are unbelievable. The commitment that they have to make of theirphysical and intellectual stamina is extraordinary. Much greater than anyventure capitalist. They also have lives. They have families, friends, children,and they are really, really close to these people. Our job is only to hire and fireCEOs. Their job is to hire and fire every single executive in that company.And so the emotional strain that their job puts on them— They have to befiercely competitive and willing to win. They have to see the glass half fulljust like we do every single day. Every morning stand naked in front of themirror and know what their faults are. Our job is not nearly that brutal; it’sjust not.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: In both cases, the entrepreneur and the venture capitalist have a responsibilityto produce, to make a venture successful. You to the people who haveinvested in your fund and similarly—Winblad: Yes, our goals are aligned and should be aligned. They are shareholders in thecompany as well. Big wins have big results for these entrepreneurs as well,and also it sustains their livelihood as the companies grow. So for our goodcompanies, we see really tight alignment here. That alignment also requiresthe willingness to grow into large companies, and that takes time. That meansthe eye on the big prize, not the eye on the small prize. That’s why it’s so hardto find great CEOs that are willing to take the risk for the long game and thebig prize, because that’s the same prize that we have to keep our eye on. Atthe same time, good entrepreneurs also realize when that prize diminishes, andwhen we have to accept a silver or a bronze versus a gold medal, and thenhow we would work for that and make that successful outcome for everybodyand their careers. One of the things that we have to do as venture capitalists isalign all of our goals, otherwise it’s just an awful experience. <|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Well, I think we have to wind up.Winblad: Yes we do, because I have four more minutes! [laughing]<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: I read and I can well believe after hearing you talk that you are considered apower broker of the industry. I don’t know whether you accept that willingly,but regardless of that, what are people thinking when they give a term like thatto a person, which isn’t done very often? Where does the power come from?Winblad: I’ll graciously accept that compliment only because I think more womenshould accept that they have some power. Power to me means that you havegained respect in your career, and that respect allows you to pick up thetelephone and walk into the circle of key decision-makers in your industry. [Itmeans] that you are consulted by those decision-makers on some of their corestrategies, that people recognize you—even when you are a competitor—as acollaborator to your industry, and that when they do reach out to you or youstep into that circle of big decisions, that you’re willing to state your opinionbased on your collective experience and knowledge, and that you’re not afraidto state it and that you’re not afraid for your opinion to be wrong. I thinkthat’s what power means. I think that experience gives you the courage tomake mistakes, and the courage and then the power to state your own opinion.My father always said one thing to me as the oldest child—I never hadcurfews, I never had rules, and when I would ask, “What should I do? Whattime should I be home?” I can remember asking this as a very young girl, andmy father said, “Ann, trust your own good judgment. I do.” And that told methat I had to build good judgment, and the only judgment I had to trust wasmy own.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: Wonderful answer, wonderful interview.Winblad: Thank you.<|endoftext|>
Interviewer: And I thank you!Winblad: Thanks. 
